






































Microsoft Word - ICNLSP2019_cjlin_cameraReady_final.docx


Abstract 

This paper introduces our preliminary work 
in dictionary expansion by adding English 
and Chinese Wikipedia titles along with 
their linguistic features.  Parts-of-speech of 
Chinese titles are determined by the 
majority of heads of their Wikipedia 
categories.  Proper noun detection in 
English Wikipedia is done by checking the 
capitalization of the titles in the content of 
the articles.  Title alternatives will be 
detected beforehand.  Chinese proper noun 
detection is done via interlanguage links 
and POS.  The estimated accuracy of POS 
determination is 71.67% and the accuracy 
of proper noun detection is about 83.32%. 

Keywords—dictionary expansion, proper 
nouns, parts-of-speech, Wikipedia 

1 Introduction 

Dictionaries play an important role in many NLP 
researches.  A dictionary contains a list of words.  
It can be used to provide candidates in Chinese 
word segmentation.  If a dictionary  also collect 
phrases, it can help to detect syntactic units when 
doing syntax parsing.  Some dictionaries provide 
information about parts-of-speech or semantics, 
which is important for POS tagging and many 
other NLP applications (Harabagiu and Hickl, 
2006; Allam and Haggag, 2012; Liu et al., 2016). 

A major issue of using dictionaries is the 
expansion of unknown words.  This issue is 
especially important in Chinese word 
segmentation.  If the dictionary does not recognize 
many new words, it is impossible to segment an 
input sentence correctly.  It might be easy to collect 
unknown words from the Internet such as 
Wikipedia, but their parts-of-speech or other 
important linguistic features are not easy to be 

determined, because their sources are not designed 
for NLP purposes. 

In NLP domain, there have been many 
researches about extracting information from 
Wikipedia in different aspects and methods.  
Popular researches include knowledge base 
expansion (Ji and Grishman, 2011), Wikipedia 
article similarity measurement by the hierarchy of 
categories (Ponzetto and Strube, 2007; Witten and 
Milne, 2008), infobox completion (Wu and Weld, 
2008), and so on.  Many NLP applications used 
Wikipedia as a resource, such as improving 
machine translation by Wikipedia interlanguage 
links (Jones et al., 2008; Nguyen et al., 2009), 
measuring document similarity (Nakamura et al., 
2014), word sense disambiguation (Hoffart et al., 
2011), annotating Wikipedia entries in documents 
(Kulkarni et al., 2009), and question answering 
(Buscaldi and Rosso, 2006; Waltinger et al., 2011), 
including answer-type decision by Wikipedia 
(Huang et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2016). 

This paper proposes methods to expand English 
and Chinese dictionaries by adding titles of 
Wikipedia articles, for they are new and constantly 
maintained.  Note that many of them are indeed 
multi-word phrases.  Methods to add linguistic 
features to these new words, such as parts-of-
speech, and proper nouns, are also discussed. 

This paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 
describes how we preprocess data in Wikipedia.  
Section 3 introduces our approach to determine 
parts-of-speech.  Section 4 proposes methods to 
decide whether a title is a proper noun or not.  
Section 5 shows the experimental results and 
Section 6 concludes the paper. 

2 Preprocessing Wikipedia Data 

Wikipedia is a collaborative encyclopedia 
contributed by real users around the world.  It 
contains millions of Chinese pages and tens of 

Expanding English and Chinese Dictionaries by Wikipedia Titles 
 
 
 

Wei-Ting Chen, Yu-Te Wang and Chuan-Jie Lin 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 

National Taiwan Ocean University 
{10757025, 00557025, cjlin}@ntou.edu.tw 

 
 



millions of English pages.  However, not all pages 
are main encyclopedia articles, such as the pages 
listed as follows.  They should be discarded 
beforehand.  
(1) Removing administration pages: An 

administrative page usually has a title 
containing a semicolon but not followed by a 
whitespace, such as “Help:Category” in 
English Wikipedia or “使用說明:分類” in 
Chinese Wikipedia.  These are not main 
articles hence should be removed. 

(2) Removing disambiguation pages: A 
disambiguation page defines an ambiguous 
term by providing a list of Wikipedia articles 
as reference.  For example, the term “blue” 
may refer to a color “Blue”, a movie “Three 
Colors: Blue”, or many other meanings 
provided in the page “Blue (disambiguation)”.  
These are not main articles hence should be 
removed. 

(3) Removing list pages: A list page provides a 
list of Wikipedia articles concerning a 
specific topic, such as “List of Game of 
Thrones characters”.  We think the titles of 
these pages are not suitable for dictionaries 
and discard them.  The title of an English list 
page usually starts with “List of” or “Lists of”.  
A Chinese list page is often categorized under 
“xxx索引” (index) or “xxx列表” (list). 

(4) Pending redirect pages: Redirect pages 
often link titles to an authoritative and highly 
correlated page, sometimes these titles are 
paraphrases.  For example, both “US” and 
“USA” redirect to the page “United States”.  
These pages are not included in our work 
described in this paper.  In the future, if we 
can determine whether the title of a redirect 
page is a paraphrase to a main page, we can 
add this title into our dictionary and share the 
same linguistic features as its authoritative 
title. 

After removing these pages, all other titles will be 
added into our dictionaries.  The following sections 
propose methods to decide their linguistic features. 

3 Parts-of-Speech Determination 

Our first challenge is to determine the part-of-
speech of each Wikipedia title.  POS information is 

                                                           
1 http://ckip.iis.sinica.edu.tw/CKIP/engversion/ 
20corpus.htm 

not explicitly given in Wikipedia but is essential for 
many NLP techniques. 

The solution might be easier in English, because 
it is a convention to write the title of an 
encyclopedia article in its nominal form.  For 
example, the editors tend to create an article named 
“humiliation” rather than “to humiliate”.  However, 
its corresponding Chinese title “羞辱” is a verb.  

Since most of the English titles are nouns, we 
can determine the part-of-speech of a title by 
deciding whether this title is in singular or plural 
form (NN vs. NNS) or a common noun or proper 
noun (NN vs. NNP).  This process is not the main 
focus of this paper thus will not be discussed here. 

Chinese Wikipedia titles may have parts-of-
speech other than nouns.  In Chinese, many verbs 
and adjectives can be nominalized without 
inflection, such as the previous example “羞辱”.  
These words only have parts-of-speech of verbs in 
Academia Sinica Lexicon 1 , a standard Chinese 
lexicon, and will be not tagged as Nv (nominalized 
verb) until being nominalized in sentences.  
Therefore, there are many possible POS candidates 
for Chinese titles. 

Besides, as defined in the Academia Sinica 
Lexicon, there are 44 different parts-of-speech in 
Chinese.  We only consider open classes, i.e. nouns, 
verbs, and adjectives, to be POS candidates of new 
terms.  A complete list is shown in Table 1. 

POS Meaning 
A Non-predicative adjective 
Na Common Noun 
Nb Proper Noun 
Nc Place Noun 
Nd Time Noun 
VA Active Intransitive Verb 
VAC Active Causative Verb 
VB Active Pseudo-transitive Verb 
VC Active Transitive Verb 
VCL Active Verb with a Locative Object 
VD Ditransitive Verb 
VE Active Verb with a Sentential Object 
VF Active Verb with a Verbal Object 
VG Classificatory Verb 
VH Stative Intransitive Verb 
VHC Stative Causative Verb 
VI Stative Pseudo-transitive Verb 
VJ Stative Transitive Verb 
VK Stative Verb with a Sentential Object 
VL Stative Verb with a Verbal Object 

Table 1: Open Classes of Chinese Parts-of-Speech. 



Our approach to decide a Chinese title’s POS is 
counting the parts-of-speech of the heads of the 
title’s categories.  As another convention, 
Wikipedia categories are often written in noun 
phrases, too.  The heads of these phrases are often 
(but not always) hypernyms of the Wikipedia title.  
For example, the term “自 燃” (spontaneous 
combustion) belongs to the category “燃 燒” 
(burning) and hence is a verb in Chinese.  Similarly, 
the term “自由滑” (free skating) is a verb because 
it belongs to the category “花式滑冰” (figure 
skating) whose head “滑冰” (skating) is a verb in 
Chinese.  

Since Chinese is a head-final language, i.e. the 
head of a phrase appears at the end of that phrase, 
we segmented the Wikipedia category labels by the 
Academia Sinica Lexicon and treated the last 
words as the heads. 

The same approach might be able to predict a 
title’s semantic class as well, because the most 
frequent head is highly related to its semantic class.  
Take the term “飆風特攻” (Point Break) as an 
example.  Heads of 16 of its Chinese categories are 
“電影” (movie).  6 of them are hyponyms of 
“movie”, including “驚悚片” (thriller film) and 
“動作片” (action movie).  Only 2 heads are not 
related to “movie”.  We can say that the semantic 
class of “飆風特攻” is “movie”.  As we have also 
observed some counter examples, this idea will be 
explored more fully in the future. 

4 Proper Noun Identification 

Our second challenge is to identify proper nouns 
from these Wikipedia titles.  Some Wikipedia 
articles are about proper nouns (such as “United 
Nations”) and some are not (such as “Rainbow”).  
As we know that proper nouns carry more 
information than common nouns, it will be great if 
the information of proper nouns can be added into 
a dictionary. 

Proper nouns can be identified based on two 
features.  One feature is infobox template or 
category type.  The other is the distribution of 
capitalization.  We will discuss these two features 
in the following sections. 

4.1 Finding Proper Nouns by Special 
Categories 

Some classes of Wikipedia articles can be easily 
decided by their categories and infoboxes.  We use 

the following rules to collect articles in special 
categories and decide their properness. 

(1) Person names: If an article uses an infobox 
template which belongs to the category of 
“people and person infobox templates” (in 
English Wikipedia) or “人物信息框模板” 
(in Chinese Wikipedia), its title is considered 
as a person name. 

(2) Location names: If an article uses an 
infobox template which belongs to the 
category of “geography and place infobox 
templates” (in English Wikipedia) or “地理
和場所信息框模板” (in Chinese Wikipedia), 
its title is considered as a location name. 

(3) Letters and numbers: Pages about 
alphabets of a language, numbers, dates, and 
domain names are NOT proper nouns.  They 
belong to some specific categories and can be 
easily identified. 

When we say that an article belongs to Category B, 
we mean that this article belongs to a category that 
is Category B itself or B’s descendant in the 
Wikipedia category hierarchy.  

4.2 Finding Proper Nouns by Capitalization 

Proper nouns in English are usually capitalized.  
However, it is not that straightforward because a) 
titles of Wikipedia articles do not always appear in 
the content, and b) words at the beginning of 
sentences are also capitalized. 

To deal with the first issue, we find that the 
absent titles may be mentioned by using different 
words or phrases.  These alternatives can be found 
by several ways as discussed later. 

To identify proper-noun titles, we define a set of 
rules to classify them into several groups.  The 
main feature in the grouping rules is the frequency 
of a title being capitalized in its article.  The 
majority in a group defines its likelihood of having 
proper nouns as members. 

Title Alternatives 

In the case that a title does not appear in the article 
by itself, we need to find its alternatives by the 
following methods before counting the frequency 
of capitalized cases. 

(1) Removing phrases after punctuations 
Sometimes an additional phrase is attached to 
a title with a punctuation for the purpose of 



disambiguation.  Such a phrase is not part of 
a name and should be removed. 
Arena, North Dakota (alternative: “Arena”) 
Arena is an extinct town in Burleigh County, 
North Dakota. The GNIS classifies it as… 

(2) Removing parenthesized phrases 
Sometimes a parenthesized string is attached 
to a title for the purpose of disambiguation.  
Such a phrase is not part of a name and 
should be removed.  
Android (robot)  (alternative: “Android”) 
An android is a humanoid robot or synthetic 
organism designed to look and act like… 

(3) Detecting boldfaced phrases in the lead 
sections 
A lead section2 of a Wikipedia article “serves 
as an introduction to the article and a 
summary of its most important contents.”  If 
the author wants to use a different string to 
substitute the title, he or she will introduce 
this phrase in the lead section in boldface. 
Namhansan (alternative: “Namhan Mountain”) 
Namhan Mountain is a 460 m peak in 
Gyeonggi-do province, South Korea… 
If there are two or more boldfaced phrases in 
the lead section, we choose the one which 
appears the most times in the article, or the 
most similar one (by edit distance) if tied.  In 
the following example, the title “Halahala” 
does not appear in the article at all, but 
“Halāhala” appears many times, hence being 
chosen as the title’s alternative. 
Halahala (alternative: “Halāhala”) 
Halāhala (Sanskrit हलाहल) or kālakūṭa 
(Sanskrit कालकूटं, literally: ‘black mass’ or 
‘time puzzle’) is the name of a poison… 

Grouping Rules 

For each title (or its alternative if the original title 
does not appear in the article), we first count the 
times it is being capitalized or lowercased, at the 
beginning or in the middle of a sentence.  But it 
does not count if the target title appears in a longer 
Wikipedia title.  For example, the article of the 
term “football” contains the sentence “In 1888, the 
Football League was founded in England, 
becoming the first of many professional football 

                                                           
2 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Lead_se
ction 

competitions.”  The capitalized phrase “the 
Football League” is another Wikipedia title.  So the 
term “football” only counts once, as “being 
lowercased in the middle of a sentence”.  

According to the times of a title being 
capitalized in its article, we define 10 groups as 
follows.  The grouping rules are applied in order.  
One title can only belong to one group.  A title 
which does not match any rule will remain 
unclassified. 

G00: If a title has one capital letter which is not at 
its beginning, such as the capital ‘M’ in the 
title “HiM”, it belongs to this group and is 
considered as a proper noun.  Note that a title 
only being uppercased in its article also 
belongs here.  An example is the title 
“Lindauer Dornier” in the sentence 
“Lindauer DORNIER GmbH is a family-
owned business…” 

G01: If a single-word title has ever been 
capitalized inside (not at the beginning of) a 
sentence, such as “Animalia” in the sentence 
“Julia MacRae Books published an 
Animalia colouring book in 2008”, it 
belongs to this group and is considered as a 
proper noun. 

G02: If a single-word title is more often 
lowercased than capitalized inside its article, 
it belongs to this group and is considered as 
a common noun.  An example is the title 
“Chuckwagon” which is found 4 times 
capitalized but 20 times lowercased inside 
its article.  It is a type of wagon so it is just a 
common noun. 

G03: If a single-word title is only lowercased in 
its article, it belongs to this group and is 
considered as a common noun. 

G04: If a single-word title is only capitalized in its 
article but all at the beginning of sentences, 
it belongs to this group.  Following the 
majority rule, i.e. most of the observed titles 
in this group are proper nouns, they are 
considered as proper nouns. 

G05: If a single-word title does not appear in its 
article at all, it belongs to this group.  



Following the majority rule, they are 
considered as common nouns. 

G06: If a multi-word title contains a lowercased 
content word, it belongs to this group and is 
considered as a common noun.  An example 
is the title “Ames test”, where “test” is a 
content word but lowercased. 

G07: If a multi-word title is capitalized at least 
once in its article, such as the title “First 
Women's Bank of California” in the sentence 
“The First Women's Bank of California was 
a local Los Angeles bank dedicated to…”, it 
belongs to this group and is considered as a 
proper noun. 

G08: If a multi-word title appears in its article but 
written in lowercase, such as the title “Push 
Stick” in the sentence “The purpose of a 
push stick is to help the user…”, it belongs 
to this group and is considered as a common 
noun. 

G09: A multi-word title does not appear in its 
article, but its head is often capitalized inside 
the article, it is considered as a proper noun. 

4.3 Finding Proper Nouns by Interlanguage 
Links and POS 

Because Chinese does not have capitalization, our 
first approach to identify Chinese proper nouns is 
via interlanguage links which connect Wikipedia 
articles discussing the same topic but in different 
languages.  If a Chinese article links to an English 
article in the groups G00 ~ G09, the Chinese title 
joins that group and can be classified as its majority. 

However, half of the Chinese articles do not link 
to any English articles.  We need to look for other 
solutions in the future.  

5 Experiments 

The experimental data are dumped files of English 
Wikipedia and Chinese Wikipedia on 2019/2/1.  
After removing administrative, disambiguation, 
and list pages, there are totally 5,679,503 English 
Wikipedia main articles and 995,294 Chinese 
Wikipedia main articles.  After further identifying 
person names, location names, letters and numbers, 
3,905,050 English and 839,174 Chinese articles are 
waited to be processed as shown in Table 2.  

5.1 Parts-of-Speech Determination for 
Chinese Titles 

To observe the correctness of POS determination, 
we chose 21,211 Chinese titles which have 
appeared and been manually POS-tagged in ASBC 
(Academia Sinica Balanced Corpus) (Chen et al., 
1996) and have category labels in Wikipedia.  Note 
that they may have more than one POS in ASBC.  
Methods introduced in Section 3 were used to 
predict POS sets for these Chinese titles.  

We made three different observations.  If only 
top 1 choice counted, there were 11,459 correct 
guessing with an accuracy of 54%.  If any match in 
the POS sets counted, 15,201 correct guessing 
made an accuracy of 71.67%.  It means that the 
guessed POS sets were efficient candidates for 
further verification in the future.  

One major type of the errors is that categories 
tend to be nouns.  For example, the term “羞辱” 
(humiliation) is a verb in Chinese, but its categories 
are “道德” (morality), “情緒” (emotions), and “性
行為” (sexual acts), which are all nouns in Chinese. 

5.2 Proper Noun Detection in English 

3,905,050 English main articles were grouped by 
the rules introduced in Section 4.  There were still 
125,924 articles left as unclassified. 

To evaluate the accuracy of proper noun 
detection, we randomly selected a small subset in 

Type English Chinese 
Main pages 5,679,503 995,294 
Person names 1,505,094 49,592 
Location names 263,805 100,586 
Letters & numbers 5,554 5,942 
To be processed 3,905,050 839,174 

Table 2: Pre-Determined Wikipedia Pages. 

Group Articles Proper Subset Acc. 
G00 330,569 Y 101 84.16% 
G01 450,022 Y 107 80.37% 
G02 22,947 N 103 100.0% 
G03 24,490 N 103 96.12% 
G04 150,090 Y 110 91.82% 
G05 46,764 N 103 56.31% 
G06 957,198 N 162 82.72% 
G07 1,581,486 Y 222 83.33% 
G08 470 N 107 83.18% 
G09 238,037 Y 108 84.62% 
noG 125,924 N 108 83.33% 

Table 3: English Proper Noun Detection Accuracy. 



each group and assessed by human.  The 
performance is shown in Table 3.  The estimated 
overall accuracy is about 83.32%. 

One type of the errors is that a common-noun 
title appears inside a proper name but the proper 
name is not a Wikipedia title, such as “chuckwagon” 
in the name “the American Chuckwagon 
Association”.  If the title does not appear many 
times, it will be misclassified as a proper noun. 

Another type of the errors is the inconsistent 
capitalization of the writers.  For example, the term 
“East Bradford Township” is the name of a 
township in US, but the authors of this Wikipedia 
article also use “East Bradford township” to refer 
to this area, and the term is misclassified as a 
common noun.  

5.3 Proper Noun Detection in Chinese 

Only 554,892 of 839,174 Chinese articles can be 
mapped to English articles via interlanguage links.  
85,302 of them map to person names, 42,727 to 
location names, and 4,323 to letters or numbers.  
410,258 are grouped into G00 ~ G09 and 292,268 
of them are classified as proper nouns. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper depicts our preliminary work of 
dictionary expansion by adding Wikipedia titles.  
The parts-of-speech of Chinese titles are decided 
by the voting of heads of their categories.  English 
proper nouns are identified by cases of 
capitalization, while Chinese ones are identified 
via interlanguage links.  These methods achieved 
an accuracy of 71.67% in POS determination and 
83.32% in English proper noun detection.  

More modern methods will be experimented in 
the future.  Sentences containing Wikipedia titles 
will be POS-tagged to decide the titles' POS.  Their 
semantic classes and properness can be determined 
by deep learning. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was funded by the Taiwan Ministry 
of Science and Technology (grant: MOST 106-
2221-E-019-072.) 

References 

Ali Mohamed Nabil Allam and Mohamed Hassan 
Haggag. 2012. The question answering systems: a 
survey. International Journal of Research and 
Reviews in Information Sciences (IJRRIS), 
2(3):211-221. 

David Buscaldi and Paolo Rosso. 2006. Mining 
knowledge from Wikipedia for the question 
answering task. In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 727-730. 

Keh-Jiann Chen, Chu-Ren Huang, Li-ping Chang, and 
Hui-Li Hsu. 1996. Sinica Corpus: design 
methodology for balanced corpora. In Proceeding 
of the 11th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, 
Information and Computation, pages 167-176. 

Po-Chun Chen, Meng-Jie Zhuang, and Chuan-Jie Lin. 
2016. Using Wikipedia and semantic resources to 
find answer types and appropriate answer candidate 
sets in question answering. In Proceedings of the 
Open Knowledge Base and Question Answering 
(OKBQA) Workshop, the 26th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING 2016), pages 1-10. 

Sanda Harabagiu and Andrew Hickl. 2006. Methods 
for using textual entailment in open-domain 
question answering. In Proceedings of the 21st 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the ACL, 
pages 905-912. 

Johannes Hoffart, Mohamed Amir Yosef, Ilaria 
Bordino, Hagen Fürstenau, Manfred Pinkal, Marc 
Spaniol, Bilyana Taneva, Stefan Thater, and 
Gerhard Weikum. 2011. Robust disambiguation of 
named entities in text. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing (EMNLP ‘11), pages 782-792. 

Zhiheng Huang, Marcus Thint, and Zengchang Qin. 
2008. Question classification using head words and 
their hypernyms. In Proceedings of the Conference 
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP ‘08), pages 927-936. 

Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2011. Knowledge base 
population: successful approaches and challenges. 
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human 
Language Technologies (HLT ‘11), pages 1148-
1158. 

Gareth J.F. Jones, Fabio Fantino, Eamonn Newman, 
and Ying Zhang. 2008. Domain-specific query 
translation for multilingual information access 
using machine translation augmented with 
dictionaries mined from Wikipedia. In Proceedings 
of CLIA 2008 - 2nd International Workshop on Cross 
Lingual Information Access, the 3rd International 
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing 
(IJCNLP 2008), pages 34-41. 

Sayali Kulkarni, Amit Singh, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, 
and Soumen Chakrabarti. 2009. Collective 
annotation of Wikipedia entities in web text. In 
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD 



International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining (KDD ‘09), pages 457-466. 

Chi-Ting Liu, Shao-Heng Chen, and Chuan-Jie Lin. 
2016. Learning textual entailment classification 
from a Chinese RITE dataset specialized for 
linguistic phenomena. In Proceedings of IEEE 17th 
International Conference on Information Reuse and 
Integration (IRI), IEEE International Workshop on 
Empirical Methods for Recognizing Inference in 
Text (EMRITE), pages 506-512.  

Tatsuya Nakamura, Masumi Shirakawa, Takahiro Hara, 
and Shojiro Nishio. 2014. Semantic similarity 
measurements for multi-lingual short texts using 
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 2014 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint Conferences 
on Web Intelligence (WI) and Intelligent Agent 
Technologies (IAT), pages 22-29. 

Dong Nguyen, Arnold Overwijk, Claudia Hauff, Dolf 
R. B. Trieschnigg, Djoerd Hiemstra, and Franciska 
de Jong. 2009. WikiTranslate: query translation for 
cross-lingual information retrieval using only 
Wikipedia. Evaluating Systems for Multilingual and 
Multimodal Information Access, 5706:58-65. 

Simone Paolo Ponzetto and Michael Strube. 2007. 
Knowledge derived from Wikipedia for computing 
semantic relatedness. Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research (JAIR), 30:181-212. 

Ulli Waltinger, Alexa Breuing, and Ipke Wachsmuth. 
2011. Interfacing virtual agents with collaborative 
knowledge: open domain question answering using 
Wikipedia-based topic models. In Proceedings of 
the 22nd International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAI-11), pages 1896-1902. 

Ian Witten and David Milne. 2008. An effective, low-
cost measure of semantic relatedness obtained from 
Wikipedia links. In Proceeding of AAAI Workshop 
on Wikipedia and Artificial Intelligence: an 
Evolving Synergy, pages 25-30. 

Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2008. Automatically 
refining the Wikipedia infobox ontology. In 
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on 
World Wide Web (WWW ‘08), pages 635-644. 


