




































Correlating Metaphors to Behavioural Data: 

A CRITT TPR-DB-based Study 

 

Abstract 

 There exist a strong correlation between the 

number of translation options available for a 

certain word and the translator’s eye movements. 

Indeed, higher translation entropy (HTra) has 

been shown to increase uncertainty in translation 

choices, thus making the translation process 

costlier, whereas lower entropy facilitates the 

translation of a particular word into its target 

rendition. 

 

This exploratory study has been carried out at 

Kent State University during the second ME-

MENTO boot camp, and seeks to explore how 

translation entropy values relate to metaphors and 

how these correlate to behavioural data. This is 

achieved by retrieving and analysing existing da-

tasets contained in the CRITT TPR-DB. Datasets 

with the English-Spanish language pair (BML12, 

six texts) are analysed in order to explore the cor-

relation between metaphors and behavioural data. 

Metaphors are annotated in the source text files 

and then correlated to their renditions in the target 

texts. The identification of different types of met-

aphors in the source texts is performed through the 

application of the updated version of the Meta-

phor Identification Procedure (MIP) developed at 

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (MIPVU). 

 

The behavioural data in the TRP-DB are analysed 

on the basis of two parameters: (a) first fixation 

duration (FFDur) on the source-text item(s) used 

metaphorically; (b) total reading time (Trts) on the 

source-text items used metaphorically. Both 

measures are assessed and correlated to HTra, 

                                                 
 © 2019 Faustino Dardi. This article is licensed under a Cre-
ative Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. 

which has been demonstrated to have a significant 

effect on both FFDur and Trts: first fixation dura-

tions are shorter for source-text items with low 

translation entropy than for items with a larger 

number of translation alternatives. Considering 

that these latter findings confirm the Literal 

Translation Hypothesis – according to which 

words are first translated literally –, the same pro-

cedure can be tentatively applied to metaphor 

translation, delving into studies not originally per-

formed to investigate metaphorical language 

translation. A further insight can be given for 

cross-lingual distortion (Cross) between source- 

and target-text items, in order to explore how the 

latter correlates to FFDur and Trts and, in partic-

ular, if any significant difference can be detected 

when compared to HTra. 

 

It is possible to establish additional correlations 

between FFDur, Trts and the strategies used for 

translating the metaphors, and in particular if 

shorter or longer FFDur and Trts correspond to 

certain translation strategies. The framework for 

classifying the target-text translation of source-

text metaphors will include five strategies: (1) the 

translation of a source-text metaphor into an exact 

equivalent in the target text (M–M); (2) the 

translation of a source-text metaphor into another 

metaphorical phrase with the same meaning in the 

target text (M1–M2); (3) the paraphrase of a 

source-text metaphor in the target text (M–P); (4) 

the translation of a source-text non-metaphor into 

a metaphor in the target text (NM–M); (5) deletion 

or omission. 

 

 

Faustino Dardi 

Durham University 

Dept. of Modern Languages and Cultures 

England, United Kingdom 
faustino.dardi@durham.ac.uk 

 

 

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 21



References 

Jakobsen, Arnt L., and Kristian T. Hvelplund. 2008. 

“Eye Movement Behaviour across Four Different 

Types of Reading Task.” Copenhagen Studies in 

Language, 36 (1):103–124. 

Krennmayr, Tina. 2008. “Using Dictionaries in Lin-

guistic Metaphor Identification.” Selected Papers 

from the 2006 and 2007 Stockholm Metaphor Festi-

vals, edited by Nils-Lennart Johannesson and David 

C. Minugh, 97–115. Acta Universitatis Stockholmi-

ensis, Stockholm. 

Schaeffer, Moritz J., Barbara Dragsted, Kristian T. 

Hvelplund, Laura W. Balling, and Michael Carl. 

2015. “Word Translation Entropy: Evidence of 

Early Target Language Activation during Reading 

for Translation.” In New Directions in Empirical 

Translation Process Research: Exploring the CRITT 

TPRDB, edited by Michael Carl, Srinivas Bangalore 

and Moritz J. Schaeffer, 183–210. Springer, Cham. 

Schäffner, Christina. 2004. “Metaphor and Translation: 

Some Implications of a Cognitive Approach.” Jour-

nal of Pragmatics, 36 (7):1253–1269. 

Sjørup, Annette C. 2013. Cognitive Effort in Metaphor 

Translation. Copenhagen Business School, Copen-

hagen. 

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 22


