



















































Creation of a corpus with semantic role labels for Hungarian


Proceedings of the 13th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 220–229
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

220

Creation of a corpus with semantic role labels for Hungarian

Attila Novák1,2, László János Laki1,2, Borbála Novák1,2

Andrea Dömötör1,3, Noémi Ligeti-Nagy1,3, Ágnes Kalivoda1,3
1MTA-PPKE Hungarian Language Technology Research Group,

2Pázmány Péter Catholic University, Faculty of Information Technology and Bionics
Práter u. 50/a, 1083 Budapest, Hungary

3Pázmány Péter Catholic University, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences
Egyetem u. 1, 2087 Piliscsaba, Hungary

{surname.firstname}@itk.ppke.hu

Abstract

In this article, an ongoing research is pre-
sented, the immediate goal of which is to cre-
ate a corpus annotated with semantic role la-
bels for Hungarian that can be used to train
a parser-based system capable of formulat-
ing relevant questions about the text it pro-
cesses. We briefly describe the objectives of
our research, our efforts at eliminating errors
in the Hungarian Universal Dependencies cor-
pus, which we use as the base of our an-
notation effort, at creating a Hungarian ver-
bal argument database annotated with thematic
roles, at classifying adjuncts, and at match-
ing verbal argument frames to specific occur-
rences of verbs and participles in the corpus.

1 Introduction

Recently, state-of-the-art performance in most
NLP related tasks has been achieved by end-to-end
systems based on neural deep learning networks
(see e.g. BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) or GPT-
2 (Radford et al., 2019)) surpassing the perfor-
mance of previous systems employing some sort
of grammatical analysis. This has raised doubts as
to whether it makes sense to deal with grammat-
ical analysis at all. At the same time, the train-
ing of end-to-end systems usually requires a great
amount of training material, which is not available
in most languages. Therefore, we think it may still
make sense put an effort into the implementation
of a grammatical analysis framework as long as
the output of the system can be directly used to
perform tasks relevant to everyday users.

However, we cannot be satisfied with an anal-
ysis that relies on completely abstract categories
that cannot be clearly translated into terms that
can be linked to what that text means in a man-
ner that can also be understood by ordinary people.
An essential element of reading comprehension is
that we are able to ask meaningful questions about

the given text, and this ability is closely related
to the ability to answer questions. Therefore, our
aim is to create a system that is actually capable
of formulating relevant questions about the text it
processes. To do this, many distinctions need to
be made that are not present in syntactic annota-
tion currently available for Hungarian. This article
presents the first phase of this work, which aims to
create an annotated corpus where the annotation
contains all the features needed to generate ques-
tions concerning the text.

2 Shortcomings of the traditional
analysis

Since our goal is to create a system that can gen-
erate meaningful questions, we have decided that
when determining what distinctions need to be
made in the annotation should be basically deter-
mined by what questions can be asked concerning
the particular grammatical construction. For ex-
ample, in order to be able to formulate questions
concerning noun phrases, the Who/What? dis-
tinction is indispensable, so the system must be
able to clearly distinguish persons from things. At
the same time, we ask who or what questions con-
cerning NP’s that refer to groups or organizations
depending on the role they play in the given sen-
tence. For example, a bank is referred to linguis-
tically as a person when sending an invoice letter,
but as a thing when it is liquidated. In addition,
a more detailed classification is required to gener-
ate questions about nominal predicates. Concern-
ing the predicate in the sentence John is a doc-
tor, the question Who is John? is not very sophis-
ticated. What is John’s occupation? is a ques-
tion matching the predicate in the sentence much
more precisely. Classifying concepts as occupa-
tions, animals, tools, behaviors, etc. also makes
for the system possible to generate more specific



221

questions related to non-predicative occurrences
of noun phrases: e.g. What animal have you seen
in the garden? vs. What did you see in the garden?
This is particularly important in the case of coor-
dinated phrases where one can only identify which
conjunct is meant in the question if the question is
specific enough.

To formulate questions concerning adverbials
even at the most basic level, we also need a much
more detailed system of distinctions than what is
provided by the syntactic annotation present in
currently available tree banks. Hungarian NP’s
headed by a word in inessive case or correspond-
ing English PP’s headed by the preposition in
can have quite a number of different grammat-
ical functions. Thus we ask different questions
concerning them: (1) szeptemberben ‘in Septem-
ber’: mikor? ‘when?’, (2) Londonban ‘in Lon-
don’: hol? ‘where?’, (3) fájdalmában (felüvöltött)
‘(he screamed) in pain’: mitől? ‘what made (him
scream)?’, (4) magában (hisz) ‘(he believes) in
himself’: kiben? ‘in whom?’, (5) bajban ‘in trou-
ble’: milyen helyzetben? ‘in what situation?’, (6)
életben (marad) ‘(stay) alive’ lit. ‘(stay) in life’:
no question in general, this is part of a light verb
construction.

Generating questions concerning not only nom-
inal but also verbal predicates requires information
not provided by currently available annotation for
Hungarian. How a question concerning a verbal
predicate should be formulated using specific ar-
guments as anchors depends on the thematic roles
the arguments play. What did John do to Frank? is
an adequate question if John is an agent and Frank
is a patient. In the same situation, What happened
to Frank? and What did John do? are likewise
adequate questions.

Identification of thematic roles of verbal argu-
ment slots is also needed in order to be able to
distinguish oblique arguments from semantically
compositional relations (e.g. locative and oblique
uses of in: believe in something vs. be some-
where). We also need to distinguish parts of id-
ioms and light verb constructions from composi-
tional verb-to-argument relations. It is a joke to
ask a question concerning a non-compositionally
related constituent:

What are you holding? — A meeting.

3 The corpus

As a starting point, we chose the Hungarian sub-
corpus (Vincze et al., 2017) of the Universal
Dependencies (UD) corpus (Nivre et al., 2016)
consisting of 1800 sentences (42000 tokens) of
mainly newswire text in order to put the annota-
tion schema we propose in a context that can be
interpreted at an international level. The UD cor-
pus contains texts in many languages annotated
with morphosyntactic and dependency-based syn-
tactic analysis using unified principles and cate-
gories. Our original plan was to supplement or re-
fine the annotation in the Hungarian UD corpus
with the information needed to formulate ques-
tions. However, it turned out that the annotation
in the Hungarian sub-corpus does not correspond
to the currently valid UD specification in many re-
spects, and contains many random annotation er-
rors, so fixing these errors turned out to be an in-
evitable part of our task.

According to the UD 2.0 specification1, the
internal structure of multiword expressions is
to be annotated using the flat, fixed or
compound dependency relations. The fixed
relation is used exclusively to annotate fully lex-
icalized function-word-like structures. In many
languages, such as English, multiword names are
generally considered to be flat exocentric struc-
tures, and the use of flat is suggested to annotate
the internal structure of these names with all words
of the name directly attached to the first word of
the name. On the other hand, the UD 2.0 an-
notation specification explicitly excludes the use
of this type of analysis in cases where the name
has a regular syntactic structure (eg. in the case
of book or movie titles or a large part of names
of organizations). Here the generic syntactic de-
pendency structures are to be used. Similarly,
endocentric structures should be annotated using
the compound relation or one of its sub-types2

(see e.g. Kahane et al. (2017) on the contradic-
tion of applying the flat annotation to languages
where names are endocentric). Hungarian noun
phrases are always right-headed endocentric struc-
tures, so in the case of names that do not have a
regular structure and compositional meaning, the
compound relation is to be used. This ensures,

1http://universaldependencies.org/
guidelines.html

2https://universaldependencies.
org/u/overview/specific-syntax.html#
multiword-expressions

http://universaldependencies.org/guidelines.html
http://universaldependencies.org/guidelines.html
https://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/specific-syntax.html##multiword-expressions
https://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/specific-syntax.html##multiword-expressions
https://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/specific-syntax.html##multiword-expressions


222

for example, that case endings always attached to
the head of the NP are directly accessible. E.g. the
head of an object NP is always in the accusative
case in Hungarian. The current annotation for
names completely obscures this fact (see e.g. az
Egyesült Államokat ‘the united States[Acc]’ in
Figure 1)). Therefore, as one of the preprocessing
steps, all multiword names, originally erroneously
annotated in the corpus as flat structures, were
automatically converted into compound struc-
tures (Figure 1). For the time being, the identi-
fication and further reannotation of names with a
completely regular structure has not been done, as
this requires manual intervention.

Structures like Angela Merkel német kancellár
‘German Chancellor Angela Merkel’ were often
erroneously annotated as appositive structures in
the corpus.3 We converted these structures intro-
ducing the compound:title_of relation be-
tween the name and the occupation/role.

The UD 2.0 specification prescribes the use of
the obl relation to attach NP arguments other than
subjects, objects or indirect objects even in the
case of nonverbal heads. Often, some other re-
lation was used in the corpus even for verbal ar-
guments. We were able to automatically correct
most of these annotations in the case of arguments
of verbs and participles (Figure 2).

In Hungarian, like in German, verbal particles
are detached from the verb in various syntactic
constructions, and they are moved to some dis-
tinct syntactic position. Nevertheless, these par-
ticles are considered part of the verb lemma. The
verbal argument database that we created as part of
our annotation effort, also contains particle verbs
in this form. In the Hungarian UD corpus, on the
other hand, verb lemmas did not include the parti-
cle in such cases. This needed to be fixed (adding
the particle to the verb lemma) in order for the ver-
bal argument frames could be matched to their oc-
currences in the corpus. Many additional lemma-
tization errors were fixed, and we also needed to
relemmatize participles so that we can match verb
argument frames against them.

In Hungarian, demonstrative predeterminers
agree in case and number with the head of the
NP (azokat a kutyákat ‘those dogsACC’). These
structures were often annotated erroneously, with
the demonstrative predeterminer being attached to

3In appositive structures, like a bátyámmal, Péterrel ‘with
my brother, Peter’ there is case agreement between parts of
the phrase. This is not the case in these structures.

the head of the NP using the same dependency la-
bel the whole NP was annotated with. We cor-
rected these errors and attached all predeterminers
as det:predet to the head of the NP (Figure 3).

Further corrections performed automatically in-
cluded using nmod:poss instead of nmod:att
in possessive structures, (bottom of Figure 2), at-
taching all postpositions using the case relation,
and fixing clauses where the subject and the (nom-
inal) predicate were exchanged in the annotation
by mistake due to the annotators confusing the fo-
cus construction with predication. The latter errors
needed to be identified manually, the correction of
the identified structures was then performed auto-
matically (Figure 4).

4 The argument frame database

All stems of verbs and participles occurring in
the Hungarian UD corpus were collected, and
they were clustered using agglomerative cluster-
ing like in (Siklósi, 2016) based on their vec-
tor representation in a word-embedding model
constructed from a morphosyntactically annotated
corpus (Novák and Novák, 2018). This process
effectively clustered verbs having similar distribu-
tional patterns (and argument frames). Each verb
in the list was supplemented with its surface argu-
ment frames from a Hungarian verb-frame dictio-
nary (Sass et al., 2010). Using this initial repre-
sentation as a source of inspiration, we have de-
scribed the possible argument frames of each verb
manually. Our description contains the thematic
role, the surface features (case-ending, postposi-
tion, possessive suffix, etc.), possible optionality
and, if applicable, lexical/semantic constraints of
each argument. Clustering helped us to streamline
the process and simplified the task of annotators.
Annotating verbs with similar argument frames in
a batch together instead of having to process them
in some random order made it possible for us to
use an inheritance mechanism and improved con-
sistency.

The main point in describing the argument
frames of verbs was to provide as much informa-
tion as possible to make it possible to ask the best,
most accurate questions. With that in mind, our set
of thematic roles is based on widely known the-
matic role hierarchies. However, it differs from
them in minute details, just like they differ from
each other. The description of verbs is intended to
cover every possible meaning (argument frame).



223

Figure 1: Fixing the annotation of multiword names: ‘William Ramsey representing the United States at the
International Atomic Energy Agency’

Figure 2: Using the obl relation for arguments of
verbs and participles: ‘... may decrease by 2.3 million
barrels a day’ – ‘a recently completed [report] commis-
sioned by Péter Kovács, director of LRI’

Figure 3: Correction of erroneously annotated prede-
terminers: ‘... was the only way he could create that
impression’

Since verbs with similar meanings and argument
frames were already grouped in the database, it
was possible to specify common argument frames
for groups of verbs. These frames are inherited au-
tomatically by verbs belonging to the same group.
In addition, each verb can have its own argument
frame which does not apply to the whole group.

Figure 4: Correction of an exchanged subject and pred-
icate: ‘that he (ő) was one of the leaders (vezetője) of...’

This frame can be added to the record of the spe-
cific verb.

The required and optional arguments of each
verb are represented either by their thematic roles
or lexically, supplemented with the required case-
endings or postpositions. The identification of the
thematic roles is based on the question that can be
asked about the given argument or about the verb
with the given argument as an anchor. For exam-
ple, the question concerning the agent is what is
A doing?, the question concerning the patient is
what is happening to P?.

Some roles also represent a kind of semantic
category, such as CONT which refers to the con-
tent of communication, or ACT which denotes an
action (usually expressed as an infinitive xcomp).
Arguments not having a specific thematic role that
could not be used as an anchor when we want to
ask a question about the predicate were marked us-
ing the semantically neutral theme (TH) thematic
role.

The fixed components of idiomatic or semi-
compositional verbal structures are not labeled
by thematic roles but they are specified lexically.



224

These structures were supplemented with their
own argument frame descriptions (thus interpreted
as autonomous units) where this solution seemed
to be justified. For example, the description of sor
kerül ‘to take place’ (lit. ‘turn comes’) is not part
of the description of the word kerül ‘to come’, but
we have assigned an argument frame to the whole
phrase as a unit. The thematic roles assigned to
the verbs and verbal structures are summarized in
Table 1.

Since verbs of movement imply the applica-
bility of specific types of questions (e.g. How
did X get to Y?), in addition to the roles listed
in the table, a special annotation was applied to
moving actors: for example moving agents are
marked as AGMV. Our basic assumption was that
a verb can not have more than one argument hav-
ing the same thematic role. However, in some
cases – where it is necessary – the co-actor is
marked with the co- prefix. For example, sétál
valakivel ‘to walk with someone’ is represented
with AG_coAG-vAl (-vAl stands for the instru-
mental case-ending).

The argument frames described above could
also obtain some special semantic classification
which may help in the further refinement of the
possible questions. The categories used for this
are as follows:

perception (e.g. to see)
emotion (e.g. to be glad)
sound (e.g. to resound)
situation (e.g. to be pressed for time)
beginning (e.g. to be established)
cognitive (e.g. to agree)
communication (e.g. to inform)
mathematical (e.g. to add)
nonverbal communication (e.g. to nod)
self-propelled motion (e.g. to step)
financial (e.g. to transfer)
destruction (of patient, e.g. to dry up)
natural (e.g. to rain)
transformation/change (e.g. to speed up)
behavior (e.g. to flirt)
relation (e.g. to support)

Finally, the argument frames also have a polar-
ity value indicating that the given event is positive,
negative or neutral for the patient or experiencer.

Figure 5 shows the description of the verbs
sodródik ‘to drift’, hull ‘to fall’ and zuhan ‘to
drop/plummet’ in the argument frame database. In

the first line of the extract, the PATMV_(PATH)
frame including an optional PATH argument that
can in turn be expanded as any combination of
SRC, DST and VIA arguments, as well as the neu-
tral polarity marked with @. refer to each verb
below them. Round brackets in the descriptions
indicate optionality, square brackets contain a list
of examples defining a semantic category.

At the time of writing this paper, the argu-
ment frame database contains 1604 verbs with
5994 different argument frames, including the
thematic role of each argument. Although frames
containing optional arguments (e.g. olvas AG_
(HOW)_(PAT-t)_(REC-nAk)_(TH-rÓl)_(LOC-bAn)

‘somebody reads (somehow) (something) (to
somebody) (about something) (somewhere)’)
appear as many seemingly different frames in
practice, we obtained these numbers by counting
the frames containing optional arguments and
possible thematic role variants only once.

5 Identifying the role of adjuncts

An important task is to provide a fine-grained de-
scription regarding the role of nominals with case-
ending, traditionally referred to as adjuncts. If we
approach the question from the case-endings, we
could say that the nominal having an inessive case-
ending indicates some kind of location and an-
swers the question Where?. However, if the ques-
tion is e.g. Where did Mary graduate?, it is a joke
to say In her dream. The case-endings answering
the questions Hol? ‘Where?’, Hová? ‘Where to?’
and Honnan? ‘From where?’4 are not always used
to specify the location, the source or the destina-
tion. Depending on the lemma, the suffixed forms
may express various temporal relations, modality,
etc. For most lexical items that can refer to loca-
tions, only one set of the suffixes (e.g. only the
inessive -bAn ‘in’, illative -bA ‘into’, and the el-
ative -bÓl ‘from inside’ can be used to express
location, source and destination), the rest of the
suffixes can only be used as markers of specific
oblique arguments of verbs. E.g. while for settle-
ments outside Hungary, the locative relation is al-
ways expressed using inessive (e.g. Londonban ‘in
London’), for most Hungarian settlements, the su-
peressive is used (e.g. Budapesten ‘in Budapest’,

4In Hungarian, locative/lative/delative case-endings are as
follows: the inessive -bAn ‘in’, the adessive -nÁl ‘at’, the su-
peressive -On ‘on’; the illative -bA ‘into’, the allative -hOz
‘to’, the sublative -rA ‘onto’; the elative -bÓl ‘from inside’,
the ablative -tÓl ‘from’, the delative -rÓl ‘from the top of’.



225

PATMV_(PATH)
@.
sodródik[IGE] +CHAR_ár-vAl ‘drift[V] +CHAR_tide~with’
hull[IGE] +AG_térd-rA_(CHAR~előtt) +hó +PAT~[haj|könny]-A +PAT@-pusztulás

‘fall[V] +AG~to~one’s~knees +snow +PAT’s~hair|tears (die:)+PAT@-decay’
zuhan[IGE] +EXP_álom-bA@.biotünet ‘drop/plummet[V] (fall asleep:)+EXP_into~dream’

Figure 5: An extract from the argument frame database.

Table 1: Thematic roles used in the description of argument frames

Annotation Name Question regarding the verb Example

AG agent What is AG doing? John has climbed the tree.

CHAR characterized What is characteristic of CHAR? Expertise is an advantage.

ATTR attribute – Expertise is an advantage.

EXP experiencer How does EXP feel? What has EXP perceived? John loves Mary.
John has seen a swallow.

PAT patient What happened to PAT? John kissed Mary.

PATDST patient-destination What happened to PATDST?

Where did PAT get to?
He painted the wall green.

TH theme – John relies on his intuition.

ST stimulus What effect has ST (on EXP)? John loves Mary.
John got frightened of his shadow.

CONT information content – John presented the plan to Joe.

REC recipient – John presented the plan to Joe.
Mary received a letter.

RES result How did RES come into being? Mary baked a cake.

INS instrument What is AG using INS for? John travels to work by scooter.

CAU causer What did CAU cause?

What was the consequence of CAU?
John was late because of an accident.

MOT motivation – John is studying to be an engineer.

LOC location What happened in/at/on... LOC? John kissed Mary in the cinema.

SRC source, starting point – John came out of the room.
Mary received a letter from John.

DST destination How did AG/PAT get to DST? John went into the room.

HOW mode – John deftly climbed the tree.

ASPECT aspect – John is doing well financially.

ACT action – John wants to work from home.

lit. ‘on Budapest’). On the other hand, as oblique
arguments of the verbs hisz ‘believe’ and múlik
‘depend’, all nouns take the inessive ‘in’ and the
superessive ‘on’ suffixes, respectively. Lemmas
can thus be be classified concerning what func-
tional/semantic relation is expressed by the com-
bination of the lemma and each case ending. We
identified such classes and defined templates that
describe the semantic role of each suffixed form in
the template. For all words (lemmas) belonging to
the specific class, the template yields the seman-
tics of each suffixed form.

The task can also be formulated as a classifica-
tion of adverbs. There are, of course, adverbs of
place such as a sarkon ‘at the corner’ or bankban
‘in a bank’, and adverbs of time such as télen ‘in
winter’, decemberben ‘in December’. However,
we also find adverbs of duration, e.g. 5 hónapra

‘for five months’ or a category that we could term
as ‘adverbs of garment’ such as kabátban ‘wearing
a coat’. 31 main categories have been identified,
some of which can be divided into several subcat-
egories. Together with the subcategories, we have
divided the adjuncts having locative case-endings
into 51 classes. To illustrate some of the subcate-
gories, in Table 2, we present lemmas which, when
combined with a subset of the locative suffixes,
function as adverbs of place. When combined
with other locative suffixes, they cannot function
as heads of adjunct phrases. In these cases, they
can only depend on some head word selecting that
specific suffix as the marker of a specific oblique
argument.

The first two columns of the table show the main
category (in this case, loc) and its subcategories
(all, ine, city-sup, etc.). This is followed by an



226

category example -bAn (inessive) -nÁl (adessive) -On (superessive)
loc all szekrény ‘wardrobe’ where where where
loc ade Microsoft in what where on what
loc ine állam ‘state’ where at what on what
loc sup címoldal ‘title page’ in what at what where
loc ine-sup könyv ‘book’ where at what where
loc city-ine Altenkirchen where where on which city
loc city-sup Budapest in which city where where
loc country Afganisztán ‘Afghanistan’ where where on which country

Table 2: Examples of lexical items that function as heads of locative adverbial phrases when combined with a
specific subset of locative case suffixes (cells marked with where). With other suffixes, they can only function as
oblique arguments of some predicate.

example lemma belonging to the given subcate-
gory, and the best applicable questions for each of
the case-endings -bAn, -nÁl and -On, respectively.
The questions indicate what role the suffixed word
form plays in a sentence.

6 Automatic identification of
semi-compositional structures

When identifying idiomatic and semi-
compositional verbal constructions, we focused
on the behavior of phrases with regard to the
relevant question that can be asked about the
given phrase. In the case of döntést hoz ‘to make
a decision’ (lit. ‘to bring a decision’), What does
A bring? is not an acceptable question. Similarly,
Where does A bring P? is incorrect regarding the
phrase szóba hoz ‘to mention’ (lit. ‘to bring into
word’).

We have implemented an algorithm for collect-
ing such phrases from a parallel corpus. First,
we generated word alignments in the English-
Hungarian parallel subcorpus of the OpenSubti-
tles corpus consisting of 644.5 million tokens (Li-
son and Tiedemann, 2016) using the fast align tool
(Dyer et al., 2013). To alleviate data sparseness
problems due to the rich morphology of Hungar-
ian, to improve alignment quality and to facili-
tate the subsequent light verb construction and id-
iom identification process, we used a morphosyn-
tactically annotated version of the corpus. The
English side was annotated using Stanford tagger
(Toutanova et al., 2003) and the morpha lemma-
tizer (Minnen et al., 2001), while the Hungarian
side using the PurePos tagger (Orosz and Novák,
2013) and the Hungarian Humor morphological
analyzer (Novák et al., 2016). We further post-
processed the output of the tagger/lemmatizer tool
combos, to generate an annotation in which each
word is represented by one or two tokens on the
Hungarian as well as on the English side. The first

token is the lemma with the main POS tag attached
to it, while the other optional token consists of
possible extra morphosyntactic tags (such as tense,
case, etc.) if present. We extracted at most 7-
token-long parallel phrases from the word-aligned
corpus using the phrase extraction algorithm using
the grow-diag-final heuristic implemented in the
Moses SMT toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). Of the
pairs of phrases extracted, we only kept pairs con-
taining exactly one verb both on the English and
on the Hungarian side. For each Hungarian verb
from these phrase pairs, we collected all the nouns
on the Hungarian side that were aligned with the
verb on the English side. For example, in dön-
tést hoz ‘to make a decision’ (lit. ‘to bring a de-
cision’), the Hungarian verb is hoz ‘to bring’. If
it is aligned with the verb decide on the English
side, the noun döntés ‘decision’ is also aligned
with this verb, as it does not appear as a sepa-
rate word on the English side. Note that even if
the English translation is make a decision, dön-
tés on the Hungarian side is also usually aligned
with make as well as with decision, because make
only corresponds to hoz ‘bring’ only in this and
a few other similar light verb constructions. In
contrast, e.g. in the case of the compositional
táskát hoz phrase ‘to bring a bag’, bring and bag
are both present on the English side, so these are
only aligned with their Hungarian equivalents. Fi-
nally, we have normalized and sorted the list of
nouns collected for the Hungarian verbs, based on
their frequency and their homogeneity regarding
the given verb. We cut off the end of the resulting
list (where only phrases having a compositional
meaning were gathered). The algorithm generated
6531 candidate expressions for 309 verbs.

Originally, we planned to evaluate the algo-
rithm using a list of light verb constructions5

(LVC’s) (Vincze, 2011) created from the syntacti-
5The list contains 1524 items.



227

cally annotated monolingual Szeged Dependency
Treebank (Vincze et al., 2010) and the English-
Hungarian SzegedParalell corpus. However, we
found that it would be a mistake to consider the
original list gold standard. Only 83.6% of the ex-
pressions on the Szeged list met our criteria. For
the rest, we found that there is nothing odd about
asking a question concerning the nominal part of
the supposed light verb construction. Finally, we
manually evaluated the union of the original list
and the entries returned by our algorithm (7538
items altogether). The original list had a recall of
32.2% of the true positives on the union of lists.
The precision and recall values for our algorithm
turned out to be P=28.6%, and R=84.2%. As a re-
sult, we managed to extend the list of Hungarian
LVC’s and verbal idioms significantly compared
to the original Szeged list. We extended our lex-
icon of argument frames with LVC’s and idioms
on the list we obtained by manually adding other
arguments along with their thematic roles.

7 Aligning argument frames to their
occurrences in the corpus

The first step of the algorithm aligning the argu-
ment frames to their occurrences in the UD corpus
is reading the source lexicon files containing the
argument frame descriptions and checking them
for syntactic errors. It generates the full argument
frame description for each verb by applying an in-
heritance mechanism adding the argument frames
belonging to the verb group to those pertaining
only to the given verb.

Explicit and implicit constraints on the form of
arguments (suffixes, postpositions etc.) implied
by the thematic roles in argument frame descrip-
tions are converted into constraints on features
and dependency relations applied to the morpho-
logical and syntactic annotations in the UD cor-
pus, respectively. We align the argument frames
to the verbs and the heads of phrases attached to
them in the corpus using these constraints. The
thematic roles location (LOC), destination (DST)
and source (SRC) cover noun phrases the head of
which is marked with the suffixes and postposi-
tions used to denote location, direction and source
(Where?, Where to?, From where?) and adverbs
having such meaning. The argument frames of
many verbs contain the thematic role PATH, which
can be replaced by any combination of destina-
tion, source and location passed by (VIA). For the

sake of readability, case suffixes are represented
by their underlying phonological form in the ar-
gument frame database. The alignment algorithm
converts these descriptions into feature constraints
that match the morphosyntactic descriptions in the
UD corpus.

Hungarian is a ‘pro drop’ language, i.e. subject
and singular object pronouns generally have an
explicit phonological representation in sentences
only if they are stressed (e.g. focused or in con-
trastive topic position). Subjects and objects hav-
ing no surface realization are recovered in the
alignment algorithm by introducing implicit pro-
nouns and assigning the corresponding thematic
role to them if the argument frame contains such
arguments and there is no explicit subject or object
in the given clause. For infinitives, gerunds and
participles, verbal argument frames are matched
by implicitly binding subjects and objects depend-
ing on the type of the construction, while the
rest of the arguments are matched in the regu-
lar manner. Since objects (NP’s marked with ac-
cusative case) and infinitives can only occur as ar-
guments, not as adjuncts, frames that do not con-
tain an object/infinitive are discarded if an explicit
object/infinitive is attached to the actual verb in-
stance.

The lexically bound nominal element of some
of the light verb constructions is an apparently
possessive form (annotated as the head of the
phrase like in other possessive structures), e.g.
szomszédja nyakára küldte az adóhatóságot ‘he
set the tax authority to check up on his neighbour’
(lit. ‘he sent the tax authority onto his neighbour’s
neck’). In these constructions, the actual argu-
ment that is to be assigned a thematic role is not
this semantically empty word, which rather func-
tions like an oblique case ending or postposition,
but the possessor (i.e. the neighbor in the previ-
ous example). These structures are converted into
a form similar to postpositional phrases. The real
argument (his neighbour) becomes the head in the
modified structure, and thus the appropriate the-
matic role can be directly assigned to it.

When multiple frames match the specific verb
instance, the most specific frame is selected:
matching light verb or idiomatic constructions
are ranked high, otherwise match candidates are
ranked by the length of the matching argument list.

Figure 6 shows how the original annotation of a
sentence in the original UD corpus was corrected



228

Figure 6: The result of automatic correction and assignment of thematic roles to heads of phrases and clauses
attached to verbs in a sentence in the Hungarian UD corpus: ‘The government submitted its bill for next year’s
budget to the parliament at the end of September: it bodes no good for those working in the public education sector,
László Varga told our newspaper’

and extended with thematic role labels by the the
adjunct and verbal argument frame matching algo-
rithm.

8 Conclusion

Within the scope of the ongoing research pre-
sented in this article, we have created a seman-
tically rich corpus annotation for Hungarian us-
ing the Hungarian UD subcorpus as a starting
point. Our future tasks include integrating the ar-
gument frames of nominal predicates and manual
checking of the generated thematic role annota-
tion. We may also need to finetune the interac-
tion of lexically-driven automatic adjunct annota-
tion and verbal argument frame alignment, and the
ranking of matching argument frames. Further-
more, arguments annotated with thematic roles
will need to be semantically further subcatego-
rized to be able to generate the right questions. We
have done this, but we have not yet integrated this
information with the rest of the annotation. We
will also need to extend our corpus (converting and
correcting parts of the Szeged Dependency Tree-
bank not included in the Hungarian UD corpus)
to provide enough training material for a semantic
parser.

Acknowledgments

This research has been implemented with support
provided by grants FK 125217 and PD 125216
of the National Research, Development and In-
novation Office of Hungary financed under the
FK 17 and PD 17 funding schemes as well as by
grant ÚNKP-18–3-III-PPKE-26 of the New Na-
tional Excellence Program of the Ministry of Hu-

man Resources. We would like to thank Kinga Fe-
gyó and Ivett Bognár for their participation in cre-
ating verbal argument frames and assigning the-
matic roles.

References
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and

Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. CoRR, abs/1810.04805.

Chris Dyer, Victor Chahuneau, and Noah A. Smith.
2013. A simple, fast, and effective reparameteriza-
tion of IBM Model 2. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 644–648. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Sylvain Kahane, Marine Courtin, and Kim Gerdes.
2017. Multi-word annotation in syntactic treebanks
- propositions for universal dependencies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 16th International Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, pages 181–189,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
ACL. The Association for Computer Linguistics.

Pierre Lison and Jörg Tiedemann. 2016. OpenSub-
titles2016: Extracting large parallel corpora from
movie and TV subtitles. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris, France. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Guido Minnen, John Carroll, and Darren Pearce. 2001.

https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/N13-1073
http://aclweb.org/anthology/N13-1073
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-7622
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-7622
http://aclweb.org/anthology/P07-2045
http://aclweb.org/anthology/P07-2045
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/947_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/947_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/947_Paper.pdf


229

Applied morphological processing of English. Nat.
Lang. Eng., 7(3):207–223.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris, France. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Attila Novák and Borbála Novák. 2018. POS, ANA
and LEM: Word embeddings built from annotated
corpora perform better. In Computational Linguis-
tics and Intelligent Text Processing: 17th Interna-
tional Conference, CICLing 2018, Hanoi, Vietnam.
Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Attila Novák, Borbála Siklósi, and Csaba Oravecz.
2016. A new integrated open-source morphological
analyzer for Hungarian. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’16), Portorož, Slovenia. Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

György Orosz and Attila Novák. 2013. PurePos 2.0:
a hybrid tool for morphological disambiguation.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP 2013), pages 539–545, Hissar, Bulgaria. In-
coma Ltd. Shoumen, Bulgaria.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners.

Bálint Sass, Tamás Váradi, Júlia Pajzs, and Margit
Kiss. 2010. Magyar igei szerkezetek: a leggyako-
ribb vonzatok és szókapcsolatok szótára [Hungar-
ian verbal constructions: a dictionary of the most
frequent arguments and phrases]. A magyar nyelv
kézikönyvei. Tinta Könyvkiadó.

Borbála Siklósi. 2016. Using embedding models for
lexical categorization in morphologically rich lan-
guages. In Computational Linguistics and Intel-
ligent Text Processing: 17th International Con-
ference, CICLing 2016, pages 115–126, Konya,
Turkey. Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In NAACL ’03: Proceedings of the 2003 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics on Human Language
Technology, pages 173–180, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Veronika Vincze. 2011. Semi-Compositional Noun
+ Verb Constructions: Theoretical Questions and
Computational Linguistic Analyses. Ph.D. thesis.

Veronika Vincze, Richárd Farkas, Zsolt Szántó, and
Katalin Ilona Simkó. 2017. Universal Dependencies
and morphology for Hungarian – and on the price of
universality. In Proceedings of EACL 2017, pages
356–365.

Veronika Vincze, Dóra Szauter, Attila Almási, György
Móra, Zoltán Alexin, and János Csirik. 2010.
Hungarian dependency treebank. In Proceedings
of the Seventh International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Val-
letta, Malta. European Language Resources Associ-
ation (ELRA).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324901002728
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/348_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/348_Paper.pdf
http://users.itk.ppke.hu/~sikbo/pdfs/cicling-posanalem-2018.pdf
http://users.itk.ppke.hu/~sikbo/pdfs/cicling-posanalem-2018.pdf
http://users.itk.ppke.hu/~sikbo/pdfs/cicling-posanalem-2018.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/1039_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/1039_Paper.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/R13-1071
http://aclweb.org/anthology/R13-1071
https://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/better-language-models/language-models.pdf
https://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/better-language-models/language-models.pdf
https://books.google.hu/books?id=_hBeywAACAAJ
https://books.google.hu/books?id=_hBeywAACAAJ
https://books.google.hu/books?id=_hBeywAACAAJ
https://books.google.hu/books?id=_hBeywAACAAJ
http://users.itk.ppke.hu/~sikbo/pdfs/cicling-embedding-2016.pdf
http://users.itk.ppke.hu/~sikbo/pdfs/cicling-embedding-2016.pdf
http://users.itk.ppke.hu/~sikbo/pdfs/cicling-embedding-2016.pdf
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1073445.1073478
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1073445.1073478
http://doktori.bibl.u-szeged.hu/1430/1/PhD_thesis_Vincze_Veronika.pdf
http://doktori.bibl.u-szeged.hu/1430/1/PhD_thesis_Vincze_Veronika.pdf
http://doktori.bibl.u-szeged.hu/1430/1/PhD_thesis_Vincze_Veronika.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/E17-1034
http://aclweb.org/anthology/E17-1034
http://aclweb.org/anthology/E17-1034
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/465_Paper.pdf

