




































Embedding English to Welsh MT in a Private Company 

Myfyr Prys 

Cymen Cyf 

Bangor University 

Myfyr@Cymen.co.uk 

Dewi Bryn Jones 

Bangor University 

d.b.jones@bangor.ac.uk  

 

 Abstract 

This paper reports on a Knowledge Trans-

fer Partnership (KTP) project that aimed 

to implement machine translation technol-

ogy at a Welsh Language Service Pro-

vider, Cymen Cyf1. The project involved 

leveraging the company’s large supply of 

previous translations in order to train cus-

tom domain-specific translation engines 

for its various clients. BLEU scores 

achieved ranged from 59.06 for the largest 

domain-specific engine to 48.53 to the 

smallest. A small experiment using the 

TAUS DQF productivity evaluation tool 

(Görög, 2014) was also run on the highest-

scoring translation engine, which showed 

an average productivity gain of 30% 

across all translators. Domain-specific en-

gines were ultimately successfully intro-

duced into the workflow for two main cli-

ents, although a lack of domain specific 

data proved problematic for others. Vari-

ous techniques such as domain-adaptation 

as well as improved tagging of previous 

translations may ameliorate this situation 

in the future. 

1 Introduction 

The translation industry in Wales has seen 

substantial growth over the past few decades, 

particularly in response to political pressures. 

Government legislation currently obliges all 

public sector bodies to produce bilingual versions 

                                                 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a 
Creative Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, at-

tribution, CC-BY-ND. 
1 Cymen Cyf have given their permission to be 

discussed as part of this study. 
2 The survey was completed by 874 respondents 

of all public-facing documents, while 

sociocultural pressure has also influenced private 

businesses to invest in translation services. But the 

mounting demand for translation services presents 

challenges as well as opportunities for Welsh 

Linguistic Service Providers (hereafter LSPs). 

LSPs need to balance expenditure (on staff and 

equipment) with the capacity to deal with existing 

demands for services. Technology provides one 

answer to this challenge, as the work of a single 

translator can be extended.  

 

A report by Bangor University’s Language 

Technology Unit (Prys et al., 2009) found that 

using various kinds of translation technology 

could raise the economic productivity of the 

Welsh translation industry by 40% and could also 

prevent the undercutting of translation services by 

foreign providers leveraging new technology 

(2009: 23). The uptake of translation technology 

in Wales has been slow however, with various 

surveys (Prys et al., 2009 and Andrews 2010) 

reporting percentages of Welsh translators using 

translation environment technology as low as 49% 

and 50%, compared to the figures of 82% 

(Lagoudaki, 2006) and 65% (EU Commission, 

2017) reported at the international level2 and in 

the UK respectively. While low adoption rates for 

new technology may seem inevitable in the 

context of a lesser-resourced language, the Welsh 

Government has made the expansion of such tools 

an important part of its strategy to reach a million 

Welsh speakers by 2050 (Welsh Government, 

2019: 34).  

 

from 54 countries. The author does not provide 

information on the linguistic backgrounds of 

respondents, but does mention that the survey had 

to be completed in English, which could mean that 

results were biased towards “English-speaking 

professionals” (Lagoudaki, 2006: 6). 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 41



One tool which the Welsh Government has to 

promote specialist training and skills in the private 

sector is the Knowledge Transfer Partnership, or 

KTP. KTPs involve a partnership in which a 

university works together with a private business 

in order to transfer academic knowledge relating 

to a specific field. The project described in this 

paper involved a KTP between a Welsh University 

and a North Wales LSP, Cymen Cyf. 

 

2 Cymen as an innovative Welsh LSP 

 

Cymen was first established during the mid-

eighties amid a wave of expansion in demand for 

English to Welsh translation (Andrews, 2015). 

The demographic profile of staff at Cymen fits the 

data reported by Prys et al. (2009), with a 

workforce which is primarily rural, female and 

educated to an advanced level. Staff are almost all 

recipients of further degrees in Welsh, which 

provides the fundamental skillset for the 

challenging task of English to Welsh translation. 

Cymen belies the typical image of a Welsh 

translation company, however, in that it has 

embraced a technological approach to translation. 

The use of translation memories3 and termbases is 

well-established at the company, partly as a result 

of a KTP project in 2000 which led to the adoption 

of SDL’s Translator’s Workbench software, and 

later Trados SDL. 

 

An analysis of Cymen’s translation memories 

shows that at least 300,000 words are translated 

by the company’s 16 translators each month using 

the Trados translation environment. Machine 

translation had not been implemented in the 

company until the advent of this project. 

Translation companies generally have two main 

options in this regard: to use a pre-existing paid 

service or to integrate some technical expertise 

into the company in order to implement an open 

source solution.  

 

The first option is problematic for a variety of 

reasons: companies can quickly be locked in to 

services with little flexibility or control, and 

                                                 
3 Translation memories are databases that store 

previous translations as segmented text. These 

segments can be retrieved and re-used to 

substantially speed-up repetitive translation work.   
4 BLEU (Papineni et al., 2001) is an algorithm that 

enables the automatic evaluation of a translation 

engine’s output on a scale of 0 to 100, with higher 

consequently may not be able to make the most of 

their translation engines. The second option, 

which involves integrating technical expertise 

into the company, has the advantage of leveraging 

free, open-source software with a flexible 

implementation. In practice this means that a 

company can create custom translation engines 

using their own data, while avoiding any potential 

data-protection concerns which may arise from 

having to hand over data to a multinational 

company. The aim of the KTP project was to 

realize the second option, using Cymen’s existing 

archive of past translations to train domain-

specific translation engines. Where possible, we 

also hoped to transfer the relevant expertise to the 

company’s own staff. 

3 Related work on MT 

 

Previous attempts to create machine translation 

systems for the Welsh-English language pair are 

reported in Jones and Eisle (2006) and Tyers and 

Donnelly (2009). Jones and Eisle developed a 

baseline statistical machine translation system 

using Pharaoh (Koehn, 2004), a precursor to 

Moses SMT. They trained Welsh to English and 

English to Welsh engines on a 510,813 segment 

corpus extracted from the Record of Proceedings 

of the National Assembly for Wales. The authors 

report a BLEU4 score of 40.22 for the Welsh to 

English engine and 36.17 for the English to Welsh 

engine.  

 

Tyers and Donnelly (2009) developed a Welsh to 

English module for the rule-based machine 

translation (RBMT) system Apertium. The BLEU 

scores they report are relatively low as one might 

expect for an RBMT system, with a score of 15.68 

for the Record of Proceedings of the National 

Assembly corpus. The authors argue, however, 

that such systems are crucial for lesser resourced 

languages like Welsh, drawing attention to the 

lack of publically available training corpora with 

open licensing. Beyond open source 

implementations, private companies such as 

Google and Microsoft provide English-Welsh 

translation engines that can be used within 

scores indicating better translations. It works 

through comparing the engine’s output with a 

reference translation of the same text, which is 

produced by a human translator. 

 

 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 42



translation software. A recent study by Screen 

(2018) offers evidence that using Google 

Translate within Trados for English to Welsh post-

editing tripled translators’ productivity, and cut 

typing by half. Although clearly effective, these 

services have some drawbacks including the need 

for payment and a lack of flexibility.   

 

In terms of related language pairs, the ADAPT 

Centre team at Dublin City University have 

reported on their English to Irish Moses SMT 

engine Tapadóir, which was developed for use at 

a Government department responsible for Irish 

language affairs (Dowling et al., 2015). The team 

achieved an optimal BLEU score by combining 

in- and out of domain data, drawing on a mixture 

of publically available corpora, web-crawled data 

and domain-specific translation memory data. 

However, the relative sparsity of the available data 

and the comparative complexity of Irish 

morphology reportedly caused some problems. 

The team later developed an automatic post-

editing module (APE) that allowed correction of 

certain repeated errors caused by these sparse data 

issues (Dowling et al., 2016). Dowling et al. 

(2018) reports on a comparison between the 

hybrid Moses SMT Tapadóir implementation and 

a newly developed NMT engine trained on the 

same data set. Tapadóir outperformed the baseline 

NMT engine by 8.75 BLEU points, although 

using byte pair encoding (Sennrich, 2016) with 

the NMT engine narrowed the gap slightly to 6.4 

BLEU points. The authors argue that the poor 

performance of NMT in this case is largely due to 

the Irish language target exhibiting “many of the 

known challenges that NMT currently struggles 

with (data scarcity, long sentences and rich 

morphology)” (2018: 18).  

 

Attempts to implement NMT for translation into 

another under-resourced and morphologically 

complex language, Basque, achieved more 

positive results in a recent study (Etchegoyhen et 

al., 2018) which found that an NMT system 

outperformed SMT by 4 BLEU points in  Spanish 

to Basque machine translation. The best 

explanation for this discrepancy lies in the relative 

sizes of the corpora used for training. Tapadóir 

was trained on 108,796 parallel segments, while 

the MODELA engine was trained on 3,345,763 – 

a vast difference. Given that NMT is known to 

                                                 
5  https://hub.docker.com/r/techiaith/moses-smt  
6 MERT is a tuning algorithm which uses BLEU to 

find the optimal weights for various model features 

suffer from data scarcity, it seems clear that the 

greatest challenge facing lesser-resourced 

languages is the requisition of sufficient data 

suitable for training. 

 

4 Data collection and preparation 

 

The MT system implemented is based on the 

Welsh National Language Technologies Portal’s 

(Prys and Jones, 2018) provision of Moses SMT 

(Jones et al., 2016).5 This is a baseline 

implementation of Moses SMT with a simplified 

interface and the ability to run a Moses server 

instance from a Docker container image. Some 

advantages of the implementation are that it 

simplifies installation as well as subsequent 

training, tokenization and truecasing processes, 

streamlines the use of a Moses server API in third-

party applications, and provides Docker 

containerization options. The machine translation 

provision was further expanded during the KTP 

project to include automatic tuning and evaluation 

of the Moses model using MERT6 (Och, 2003) 

and BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) respectively. 

Translation engines are trained using TMX files 

(an xml specification for transferring translation 

data between different localization software) 

extracted from Cymen’s various translation 

memories.  

 

TMXs were chosen as our main focus because 

they contain source and target segments already 

aligned, dispensing with the need for complicated 

alignment processes, and normally contain 

relatively clean data which has been carefully 

curated by the company. They were also 

convenient because the company’s archive of 

previous translations was already largely available 

in this format. 

 

Cymen’s translation memory workflow revolves 

around a policy of assigning a TM to each regular 

client (although they also have some general 

domain memories, such as ‘health’ or 

‘education’). For instance, in the case of a 

fictional client named Ideore, the process would 

work as follows: 

 

e.g. the language model, re-ordering model, and 

more. This process can significantly improve the 

quality of a translation engine. 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 43



1. Work from the client becomes frequent, 

so the company creates a dedicated Ideore 

translation memory and termbase.  

2. These resources are consolidated into a 

project template file that facilitates the creation of 

Ideore projects by admin staff. 

3.  Ideore projects are allocated to specific 

translators based on availability and expertise, and 

the translation memory starts to fill. 

 

In order to process a TMX file for training 

translation engines, certain pre-processing steps 

are necessary. Welsh and English segments are 

extracted from the TMX files and are stored in an 

SQL database, having been tagged for metadata 

such as domain (usually the client’s name), 

language pair, date, and more. Different 

permutations of data can then be selected and 

exported to parallel text files for training and 

testing. Following this the data is randomized and 

split into three parts. Two held-out data sets are 

created - a 3,000 segment test set for evaluation 

with BLEU and a 2,000 segment tuning set for 

tuning with MERT. The language model is created 

from the target side of the training corpus. Finally, 

segments from both the training set and tuning set 

are removed from the main training corpus and 

language model to avoid skewing the evaluation 

and tuning steps.  

 

5 Training the engines 

We decided to set an arbitrary threshold of a 

million Welsh words before attempting to evaluate 

the baseline capability of engines trained on such 

data. Figure 1 below shows all of Cymen’s TMs 

arranged by number of Welsh words. 

 
 

Figure 1. Each of Cymen’s TMs arranged by 

number of Welsh words, from largest to smallest 

 

As can be seen in the chart, only 4 of our TMs are 

currently large enough to satisfy this criterion. 

Table 1 displays BLEU scores for engines trained 

from these TMs client-specific TMX files, as well 

as the general-domain Cymen translation engine. 

As might be expected based on previous research 

(e.g. Koehn 2001), the scores seem to be related 

to the size of the corpus used for training as well 

as the specificity of the domain. The highest 

scoring engine is the domain-specific engine 1, 

which was trained on a 174,354 segment parallel 

corpus of data relating to a client in a technology-

related domain. Although the size of the parallel 

corpus used for training is an obvious contributor 

to its relatively high score, the nature of the 

domain, which consists of a highly technical and 

repetitive register, also seems to be a factor.   

 
Translation 

Engine ID 

Number of 

Welsh words 

Number of 

segments 

BLEU 

score 

1 3.65 million 174,354 59.06 

2 2.56 million 130,235 58.75 

3 1.54 million 83,745 50.92 

4 1.34 million 74,840 48.53 

Cymen 65.3 million 3,985,674 54.23 

Table 1. BLEU scores and corpus size for the five 

top translation engines 

 

Engines three and four had substantially lower 

scores, reflecting the smaller corpora used for 

training. For comparison, we also trained a gen-

eral domain corpus consisting of all of Cymen’s 

combined data (named Cymen in table 1). Alt-

hough trained on a comparatively large data set, 

translation engines 1 and 2 still outperform this 

engine in terms of BLEU score, which provides 

some indication of the value of using domain-spe-

cific engines.  

6 Engine effectiveness 

To gain a general idea of the effectiveness of our 

engines, we used the TAUS DQF evaluation tool 

(Görög, 2014) to carry out a productivity test on 

segments automatically translated by our highest-

scoring domain-specific translation engine (ID 1, 

BLEU score 59.06 – see table 1 above). Eight 

translators were selected to translate 50 in-domain 

segments from a held-out data set, with a total of 

. M

.5 M

1. M

1.5 M

2. M

2.5 M

3. M

3.5 M

4. M

1 3 5 7 9 1113151719212325272931

Cymen's TMs by size

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 44



905 words. The segments were randomly selected 

before being submitted to the TAUS DQF 

evaluation tool. TAUS DQF automatically 

shuffles the segments and presents half to be 

translated from scratch (i.e. without the machine-

translated output) and half to be post-edited (with 

the machine-translated output). The tool then 

times the completion of each segment and 

generates a report based on the average 

completion time for both conditions. 

   

 
 

Figure 3. The average WPH of Cymen’s 

translators while translating vs post-editing  

 

The results (figure 3) show that the participants 

produced 1,372 words per hour on average while 

post-editing as opposed to 1,055 words per hour 

while translating from scratch. Individual results 

for the translators (figure 4) show quite 

considerable variation, although all translators 

performed more quickly in the post-editing 

condition. 

  

 
 

Figure 4. WPH per condition for each translator  

 

The result of this analysis suggests that using a 

machine of this quality can increase productivity 

                                                 
7https://github.com/OpenNMT/Plugins/tree/master/

SDL%20Trados%20Plugin 

across all translators by 30%, while individual 

gains vary from a high of 41% to a low of 14%.  

7 Implementing the engines 

 

Once we were satisfied that the quality of the 

engines was of a satisfactory level, the engines 

needed to be embedded in the company’s 

translation environment software. An app for 

integrating the engines was designed on the basis 

of an open-source C# solution available on 

GitHub7. In order to allow the selection of 

multiple engines, distinct engines are run from 

their own Docker containers, which can each then 

be selected from within the Trados interface.  

 

Before the engines could be fully integrated 

into translators’ workflows, the company’s man-

agement team trialed their performance person-

ally for a probationary period. Based on this the 

management decided to start using engines 1 and 

2 in every project for the relevant clients. As en-

gines 3 and 4 were not considered of a high 

enough quality to use routinely, we decided not to 

implement them for the time being. Given that 

there is a clear link between the size of a domain-

specific engine and its effectiveness, and that the 

company’s store of data for each client is always 

growing, it was decided that we would attempt to 

retrain using these client’s data at a later date. It 

was also decided that we would start gathering an-

alytic data on the size and relative growth of trans-

lation memories on a monthly basis. This should 

allow the company to make informed decisions 

concerning whether data belonging to a particular 

client has reached a point where training an effec-

tive translation engine for it has become viable. 

 

8 Reception by translators 

In order to take possible resistance from 

translators to machine translation into account, we 

introduced the engines into their workflow 

gradually. Firstly, we waited until the output of the 

translation engines was of a relatively high quality 

- based on the management team’s assessment - 

before introducing them into the daily workflows. 

This hopefully mitigated the prospect of poor 

machine translation irreparably damaging 

translators’ feelings towards the technology. The 

practical implementation of the engines was also 

 

990
1,306

0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

Translating Post-editing

Words Per Hour (WPH) 

translating vs  post-editing

0

1,000

2,000

3,000

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

WPH for each translator

Translating Post-editing

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 45



relatively subtle, with engine allocation 

happening at management level, meaning that 

translators did not need to take any actions 

themselves. Finally, a series of four workshops 

were held for all staff, where the KTP assistant 

was able to describe the basic principles of the 

technology. Particular emphasis was placed on the 

fact that machine translation is a post-editing tool, 

which cannot replace human translators. It was 

also stressed that productivity gains associated 

with less typing and additional time can make the 

translator’s work less laborious and more 

comfortable.  

 

In general the company’s reception of the 

technology has been positive. The most obvious 

manifestation of this is that engines 1 and 2 are 

now used routinely for translating those clients’ 

respective domain-specific data, which taken 

together represent a large proportion of the 

company’s daily output. The general domain 

Cymen engine is also now used frequently for 

translating data for smaller clients that have data 

particularly suitable for machine translation. One 

feature that was repeatedly praised by the 

translators was the autosuggest capability8, which 

prompts the user with suggested words or phrases 

extracted from the translation engine as they type. 

This was seen as particularly useful because 

translators were able to leverage useful elements 

of an engine’s output even when the segment as a 

whole was not perfect. 

 

9 Future research 

Following the successful implementation of 

machine translation during the KTP, both partners 

are interested in extending the capabilities of the 

translation system. Obvious candidates for such 

improvements include neural and/or hybrid 

translation systems, which have not yet been 

reported in open source implementations for 

Welsh. However, the primary challenge facing 

Cymen is the lack of sufficient data for training 

domain-specific engines for the majority of its 

clients. Exploring domain adaptation techniques 

(e.g. Axelrod et al., 2011), which allow out-of-

domain data to be leveraged for domain-specific 

engines, offers one way of dealing with the 

scarcity of data for some domains discussed 

above. Otherwise, the main way that Cymen can 

improve its translation engines is through the 

                                                 
8 This feature is part of Trados software 

natural growth of its translation memory archive 

through daily translation work, which continues 

apace. 

10 Conclusion 

This paper has discussed the implementation of 

open-source machine translation software at a 

Welsh translation company. We have shown that 

leveraging a private company’s archive of 

previous translations to train domain-specific 

translation engines is a relatively straightforward 

task, although the success of the endeavour is to 

some extent dependent on the company storing 

translations with some kind of metadata indicating 

domain. This shows the importance of educating 

the translation sector in Wales (and beyond) in the 

value of such data and the importance of storing 

in such a way that its usefulness for future MT 

tasks is maximized. 

 

References 

Andrews, T. (2015) Cyd-destun gwleidyddol a 

chymdeithasol cyfieithu yn y Gymru gyfoes. 

In: Prys, D & Trefor, R. (Eds). Ysgrifau a 

Chanllawiau Cyfieithu. [Online]. Carmar-

then: Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol. Available 

at: https://llyfrgell.porth.ac.uk/me-

dia/ysgrifau-a-chanllawiau-cyfieithu-delyth-

prys-arobat-trefor-goln [Retrieved: 

27/01/2016]. 

Dowling, M., Cassidy, L., Maguire, E., Lynn, T., Sri-

vastava, A., and Judge, J. (2015). Tapadóir: 

Developing a statistical machine translation 

engine and associated resources for Irish. In 

Proceedings of the The Fourth LRL Work-

shop: ”Language Technologies in support of 

Less-Resourced Languages”, Poznan, Po-

land. 

Dowling, M., Lynn, T., Graham, Y., and Judge, J. 

(2016). English to Irish machine translation 

with automatic post-editing. In 2nd Celtic 

Language Technology Workshop (pp. 42-54), 

Paris, France. 

Dowling, M., Lynn, T., Poncelas, A., & Way, A. (2018). 

SMT versus NMT: Preliminary Comparisons 

for Irish. In Workshop on Technologies for MT 

of Low Resource Languages (p.p. 12-20), 

Boston, USA. 

European Commission Representation in the UK, 

Chartered Institute of Linguists and the 

Institute of Translation and Interpreting. 

(2017) 2016 UK Translator Survey - Final 

Report. Available online at: 

https://ec.europa.eu/unitedkingdom/sites/unit

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 46



edkingdom/files/ukts2016-final-report-web_-

_18_may_2017.pdf Retrieved: [28/06/2019]. 

Cymraeg 2050: 

Görög, A. (2014). Quantifying and benchmarking qual-

ity: the TAUS Dynamic Quality Frame-

work. Tradumàtica, (12), 443-454. 

Jones, D.and Andreas E. (2006). Phrase-based statisti-

cal machine translation between English and 

Welsh. In Strategies for developing machine 

translation for minority languages (5th SALT-

MIL workshop on Minority Languages), 

LREC-2006 (p.p. 75-78), Genoa, Italy. 

Jones, D.B., Prys, D., Ghazzali, S. and Robertson, P. 

(2016) Facilitating the Multilingual Single 

Digital Market: Case Studies in Software 

Containerization of Language Technologies. 

In Proceedings of META-FORUM 2016, Lis-

bon, Portugal.   

Lagoudaki, E. (2006). Translation memories survey 

2006: Users’ perceptions around TM use. 

In proceedings of the ASLIB International 

Conference Translating & the Computer (Vol. 

28, No. 1, pp. 1-29). London, UK. 

Och, F. J. (2003). Minimum error rate training in sta-

tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of 

the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for 

Computational Linguistics-Volume 1 (pp. 

160-167). Sapporo, Japan. 

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., & Zhu, W. J. 

(2002). BLEU: a method for automatic evalu-

ation of machine translation. In Proceedings 

of the 40th annual meeting on association for 

computational linguistics (pp. 311-318). Phil-

adelphia, USA. 

Prys, D. & Jones, D.B. (2018) National Language 

Technologies Portals for LRLs: a Case Study. 

In: Vetulani Z., Mariani J., Kubis M. (eds) 

Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence. 

Springer. 

Prys, D. et al. (2009). Gwell Offer Technoleg Cyfieithu 

ar gyfer y Diwydiant Cyfieithu yng Nghymru: 

Arolwg Dadansoddol [Online]. Bangor: Lan-

guage Technologies Unit, Canolfan Bedwyr. 

Available at: https://goo.gl/52ZYfj [Re-

trieved: 01/05/2019]. 

Screen, B. (2018). Defnyddio Cyfieithu Awtomatig a 

Chof Cyfieithu wrth gyfieithu o’r Saesneg i’r 

Gymraeg: Astudiaeth ystadegol o ymdrech, 

cynhyrchedd ac ansawdd gan ddefnyddio data 

Cofnodwyr Trawiadau Bysell a Thracio Lly-

gaid. (Unpublished PhD Thesis). Cardiff Uni-

versity, Wales. Available online at: 

http://orca.cf.ac.uk/111362/  

Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., & Birch, A. (2015). Neural 

machine translation of rare words with sub-

word units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909. 

Thierry Etchegoyhen, Eva Martínez, Andoni Azpeitia, 

Gorka Labaka, Iñaki Alegria, Itziar Cortes, 

Amaia Jauregi, Igor Ellakuria, Maite Martin 

eta Eusebi Calonge (2018) Neural Machine 

Translation of Basque EAMT 2018. Alicante. 

Tyers, F., & Donnelly, K. (2009). apertium-cy - a col-

laboratively-developed free RBMT system 

for Welsh to English. The Prague Bulletin of 

Mathematical Linguistics, 91, 57-66.  
Welsh Government (2019) 2050: A million Welsh 

speakers. Annual report 2017–18.  Available 

at: https://gov.wales/sites/default/files/publi-

cations/2019-03/cymraeg-2050-a-million-

welsh-speakers-annual-report-2017-18.pdf  

Retrieved: [02/07/2019]. 
 
 

 

 
 

 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 47


