




















Natural Language Semantics With Pictures: Some Language &
Vision Datasets and Potential Uses for Computational Semantics

David Schlangen
Department of Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Germany∗

david.schlangen@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract
Propelling, and propelled by, the “deep learning revolution”, recent years have seen the introduc-

tion of ever larger corpora of images annotated with natural language expressions. We survey some
of these corpora, taking a perspective that reverses the usual directionality, as it were, by viewing the
images as semantic annotation of the natural language expressions. We discuss datasets that can be
derived from the corpora, and tasks of potential interest for computational semanticists that can be
defined on those. In this, we make use of relations provided by the corpora (namely, the link between
expression and image, and that between two expressions linked to the same image) and relations that
we can add (similarity relations between expressions, or between images). Specifically, we show
that in this way we can create data that can be used to learn and evaluate lexical and compositional
grounded semantics, and we show that the “linked to same image” relation tracks a semantic implica-
ture relation that is recognisable to annotators even in the absence of the linking image as evidence.
Finally, as an example of possible benefits of this approach, we show that an exemplar-model-based
approach to implicature beats a (simple) distributional space-based one on some derived datasets,
while lending itself to explainability.

1 Introduction
In model-theoretic formal semantics, the central semantic notion “truth” is explicated as a relation be-
tween a sentence and a mathematical structure, its model. Semantics textbooks are surprisingly evasive
about what exactly this structure is meant to be, other than hinting at that it in some way represents the
general “situation”, or “world”, that the sentence is taken to be talking about. In any case, what the model
as a mathematical structure does is to provide a collection of individuals about which the sentence could
be talking, and an interpretation of the non-logical lexical items occurring in the sentence, in terms of
sets of individuals (or tuples of individuals). The collection of individuals is typically called the domain
D, and the set of interpretations I , so that a model M = 〈D, I〉.

It is this intended relation with the world that allows us to see an analogy between these structures
and photographic images. A photograph is a frozen moment in time, a representation of how the world
was (or looked like) at a certain moment, at a certain place and from a certain perspective. And just as
a sentence in formal semantics is evaluated relative to a model, a sentence describing a situation can be
seen as true relative to an image — if (and only if) the image depicts a situation of the described type.
Hence, in a slight reversal of our usual way of talking, we can say that a given image does (or does not)
make a given sentence true (instead of saying that the sentence is a true description of the image), and
we can see the image as a model of the sentence.1

What does this sleight of hand buy us? A very large amount of data to play with! The field of
computer vision has as one of its central aims to find meaning in pixels – see e.g., Davies (2012), Marr

∗Work done while author was at Bielefeld University.
1There are interesting subtleties here. In our everyday language, we are quite good at ignoring the image layer, and say

things like “the woman is using a computer”, instead of “the image shows a woman using a computer”, or “this is a computer”,
instead of “this is an image of a computer”. This also seems to carry over to tense, where we can say “is using”, instead of “was
using at the time when the picture was taken”. There are however contexts in which talk about the image as image is relevant,
and this can happen in large corpora such as discussed here. So this is something to keep in mind.



(1982) – and a convenient way of representing meaning is with natural language. It is also a field
that has been data-driven for a long time, and so there is a large number of data sets available that
in some way pair images with natural language expressions.2 Recent years have specifically seen the
creation of large scale corpora where images are paired with ever more detailed language (e.g., single
sentence or even full paragraph captions describing the image content; facts about the image spread over
question and answer; detailed descriptions of parts of the image in terms of agents and patients; see
references below).3 Given the understanding that all these expressions are meant to “fit” to the images
that they are paired with, and using the slight conceptual inversion of treating the images as “truthmakers”
(Fine, 2017) for the sentences, this gives us an unprecedentedly large set of language expressions that
are “semantically annotated.”4,5 As we will show, this gives us material to learn about the lexical and
compositional semantics that underlies the use of the expressions.

The contributions of this paper are as follows: 1.) To make explicit a perspective that so far has been
taken only implictly in the literature, which is to view images as models of natural language expressions;
2.) to show by example that taking this perspective opens up interesting data sets for computational se-
mantics questions; 3.) specifically, to look at how grounded interpretation functions could be learned
from and tested on this data, and; 4.) how data can be derived that expresses various implicature rela-
tionships; and 5.) to show how exemplar-based model building can be used to predict some of those
relations. Our code for working with the corpora mentioned here (and some others) is available at
http://purl.com/cl-potsdam/sempix.

2 Background
2.1 The Approach: Learning Semantics From Relations in Corpora

e1

I1
e2

Re/I

Re/I
Re/e

e3
I2Re/IRe/e

RI/I

M ⊨ e ?

e1 ⊨ e2 ? 
e1 ⊢ e2 ?

Figure 1: Relations in cor-
pora & to be derived

Our general approach will be to look at relations that are expressed in the
data or can be added using computational methods, and then to ask what
these can tell us about semantic relations like truth and entailment, and in
turn what these tell us about the meanings of expressions. Figure 1 illustrates
the idea. The corpora provide us with an “annotates” relation between im-
ages and expressions; in the Figure, holding between I1 and e1 and e2, and
I2 and e3, where the expressions for example could be captions. Implicitly,
there is also an “annotates same image” relation that holds between expres-
sions; here, e1 and e2, as alternative captions of the same image. Standard
natural language processing and computer vision techniques (see below) al-
low us to compute similarity relations between pairs of images (e.g., I1 and
I2) and between pairs of expressions (e1, e3). The question then is whether these relations can tell us
something about satisfaction / denotation (|=, [[·]]) and entailment (|=,`).
2.2 Corpora Used Here
We make use of data from the following corpora:
•MSCOCO / RefCoco / GoogleREX: The “Microsoft Common Objects in Context (COCO)” col-

lection (Lin et al., 2014) contains over 300k images with object segmentations (of objects from 80 pre-
specified categories), object labels, and nearly 400,000 image captions. It was augmented with 280,000

2See for example the (incomplete) lists at http://www.cvpapers.com/datasets.html and https://
riemenschneider.hayko.at/vision/dataset/.

3While there are by now some non-English or even multi-lingual corpora, the majority provide English language annota-
tions, including all of those that we discuss here.

4The corpora we discuss here provide almost 8 million distinct natural language expressions (with many more that can be
derived from them). In comparison, the largest “classical” semantics resource, the Groningen Meaning Bank (Bos et al., 2017),
provides some 10,000 annotated sentences, and the Parallel Meaning Bank (Abzianidze et al., 2017) another 15,000. There is
no competition here, though: the Meaning Bank annotations are obviously much deeper and much more detailed; the proposal
in this paper is to view the image corpora discussed here as complementary.

5The relation between images and models is implicit in (Young et al., 2014), from where we took inspiration, but not further
developed there in the way that we are attempting here. Hürlimann and Bos (2016) make an explicit connection between image
and models, but only look at denotations; as do Schlangen et al. (2016).



referring expressions by Yu et al. (2016), using the ReferitGame where one player needs to get another
to identify a predetermined object in the image, with the players getting feedback on their success. Mao
et al. (2016) also provide expressions for COCO objects, but collected monologically with the instruc-
tions to provide an expression that uniquely describes the target object.
• Flickr30k / Flickr30kEntities: Flickr30k (Young et al., 2014) is a collection of 30,000 images

from a public image website which were augmented with 160,000 captions; Plummer et al. (2015) anno-
tated these captions with positions of the objects in the images that they mention (Flickr30kEntities).
• Visual Genome: This dataset by Krishna et al. (2016) combines images from COCO and another

data set (yielding around 100k images), and augments them with 2 million “region descriptions”, which
are statements true about a part of an image, and resolved for the entities mentioned and their relations.
These descriptions are parsed into object names and attributes, and normalised by reference to the Word-
Net ontology (Fellbaum, 1998). Krause et al. (2017) added 20,000 image description paragraphs (i.e.,
extended, multi-sentence captions) for some of the images.

All these data sets give us images paired with natural language expressions; in most of them, the
relation between image and expression is annotated more fine-grainedly by linking regions within the
image to (parts of) the expressions.6 Also, some corpora provide an additional layer that could be seen
as corresponding to the logical form of the expression, for example by normalising nouns to a resource
like WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) or by annotating the predicate / argument structure.

3 Expressions and Denotations
3.1 Images as Semantic Models: An Example

Figure 2: A Segmented Image from COCO

Above, we have introduced our analogy be-
tween semantic models and images. An ex-
ample shall make it clearer. Figure 2 shows
an image (from COCO) with object segmen-
tations (rectangular patches indicating the po-
sition of an object in the image) and identi-
fiers, as provided by the corpus. We can di-
rectly treat this as the domain provided by the
model, so that here D = {o92839, o93793, o387589,
o387727, o505664, o510191, o660005, o1168354, o1587273,
o1716887, o1863940, o1864058, o1864291}.

The corpus also provides natural language
annotations for these objects, for example “the
woman in white” and “the woman in black” (for o505664, o510191, respectively). We can use this
to “reverse engineer” the interpretation functions covering these words, and in particular derive that
I(woman) ⊆ {o505664, o510191}. If we make an additional exhaustivity assumption over the set of an-
notations, we can strengthen this to I(woman) = {o505664, o510191}; that is, make the assumption that
these are the only objects (in this image / the set of segmented objects from that image) to which this
term can be applied. We will need to make this assumption when we want to generate negative instances
used in machine learning, but need to keep in mind that in general, this assumption is unwarranted, as
exhaustivity was not a goal when creating the corpora. o505664 =

Figure 3: Invidual

Continuing with the discussion, we can think more about what this view on
the corpora offers for doing semantics. Our domain D is now populated not just
with identifiers or symbols from a vocabulary, but rather with objects that have
an internal structure. In the example above we were able simply to read off the
interpretation function for the word from the annotation. But we can try to use

6This makes working with the images easier, as it allows us to assume that the task of object recognition (detecting contigu-
ous regions of pixels that belong to the same object) has already been successfully performed. This is not a strict requirement
for working with images these days, however, as high-performing models are available that do this job (Redmon and Farhadi,
2018), (He et al., 2017), but these still add noise from which one might want to abstract for the purposes discussed here.



Figure 4: Object “names” (left) and “attributes” (right) from Visual Genome, for an example image

instances like this to generalise this function. That is, we can try to turn I into a “constructive” function
that not just records a fact (“object o is in the denotation of predicate φ”), but rather produces a judgement,
given a (structured, visually represented) object; we may write Iwoman(D) to make this explicit.7

With this in hand, we can now explore how the available data could help us learn and evaluate lexical
interpretation functions and their composition. We will look at the available expression types in order of
increasing syntactic complexity. The relation that we will make use of first is the “annotates” relation
between expressions e and (parts of) images I . This relation gives us the value of [[e]]〈D,I〉 (which is an
entity or a truth value); the interest is in learning about [[·]]〈·,I〉 as it covers the constituents of e and their
composition.

3.2 Expression Types Found in Corpora
3.2.1 Sub-Sentential Expressions
Of the corpora discussed here, only Visual Genome provides open-class single word annotations. Ob-
jects in the corpus are associated with “names” (typically nouns), and “attributes” (typically adjectives),
which were semi-automatically segmented out of larger expressions provided by annotators (to be dis-
cussed below). Figure 4 shows this for one image from the set. (It illustrates at the same time how
fine-grainedly the corpus is segmented—on average it provides 36 object bounding boxes per image.)

The Visual Genome annotation provides over 105,000 word form types, of which about 10,500
have at least 10 instances. Using the normalisation to WordNet synsets in the corpus, this reduces to
roughly 8,000 types, of which 3,500 occur at least 10 times. The distribution (not shown here) is roughly
Zipfian—and reveals a certain bias in the data, with “man” occuring twice as often as “woman”, for
example. This is a sizeable vocabulary for which interpretation functions can be learned from this data.

We have briefly mentioned the problem of getting negative instances of word denotations, as re-
quired by typical machine learning methods. One method is to sample from the set of objects in a given
image that are not annotated with a word; but this requires making the aforementioned (non-warranted)
exhaustivity assumption. Schlangen et al. (2016) have shown this to be unproblematic for the data that
they used; establishing to what degree it would be here we leave to future work. It is likely to be more
of a problem for adjectives, where the choice of what to mention is governed much more by the context
than the choice of which name to use for an object.

This data can be assembled into simple nominal phrases (ADJ + N; e.g. “brown window” for top
right of Figure 4). Semantically, these would be indefinite noun phrases, as all that is guaranteed is
that they are appropriate for the object that they apply to (but there may be others of that type in a given
image). With the denotation being known, this can be used to evaluate the semantic composition.

7This perspective has previously been taken by Schlangen et al. (2016) and developed for simple expressions; the present
section builds on that work.



More interesting and complex are the noun phrases found in the referring expression corpora (the
ReferIt variants; see above). These expressions were produced in the form that they are recorded in the
corpora (unlike the single word expressions discussed above), and in an actual context of use, namely
with the aim to single out an object to a present interlocutor. This makes this data set also interesting
from a pragmatic point of view, as one can ask how the context (in the image, but also in the production
situation) may have influenced the linguistic choices. The following shows the referring expressions
available for the tennis player on the right in the image from Figure 2 above; also shown is the annotation
from the GoogleREX corpus:

(1) a. RefCoco: lady in black on right | girl in black | woman in black
b. RefCoco+: black shirt | girl in black | player in black
c. GoogleREX: woman in black tank top and shorts holding tennis racket | woman in black

outfit shaking other tennis player hand

Contrasting the GoogleREX expressions illustrates the influence of the context of use on the shape of the
expressions. The GoogleREX annotators did not have interlocutors and were just tasked with producing
expressions that describe the object uniquely. The ReferIt expressions do this as well, but additionally,
they do this in the most efficient and effective way, as the players had an incentive to be as fast as
possible, while ensuring referential success. This shows: The average length of RefCOCO expressions
is 3.5 token, that of GoogleREX 8.3.8

We also find relational expressions like the following in these corpora, which identify the target
object by relating it to another one (the landmark):

(2) woman under suitcase | laptop above cellphone right | black van in front of cab

To learn the interpretation of such relational items (here, “under”, “above”, “in front of”), it would be
good to have grounding information also about the landmark. The corpora mentioned so far do not give
us this,9 and so we turn to Visual Genome, and away from referring expressions.

Figure 5: A region description from Visual Genome

Visual Genome was collected with the explicit
purpose of providing material for learning “inter-
actions and relationships between objects in an
image” (Krishna et al., 2016). The starting point
of the annotation was the marking of a region of
interest in the image, and the annotation of that
region with a “region description”, ie. an expres-
sion that is true of that region. Note the difference
to referring expressions: no stipulation is made
about whether it is or is not true of other objects
in the image. Annotators were encouraged to pro-
vide region descriptions that are relational, and
these then form the basis of an abstracted repre-
sentation of that relation. Figure 5 shows an example of such a region description; the corresponding
annotation is shown in (3), slightly re-arranged to make clearer its similarity to classical logical forms
(LFs).10

(3) "next to a":be.v.01(1060704:puzzle.n.01, 1060699:computer monitor.n.01)

8These corpora have been used by Kazemzadeh et al. (2014), Yu et al. (2016), Mao et al. (2016), Schlangen et al. (2016),
Cirik et al. (2018) to train and test models of referring expression resolution.

9For a portion of GoogleREX, this was added by Cirik et al. (2018).
10What this also illustrates is that the normalisation decisions made in the corpus can occasionally be somewhat questionable.

Here, the part “next to a” is normalised to the verb “be”; presumably, the annotator added the elided copula here and rather
ignored the spatial relation.



Figure 7: “A man standing in the snow with skis on.” (left), and distractors (visual similarity, middle;
semantic similarity, right)

Figure 6: “there are desktop computers on the desk”

There are over 5 million region descriptions
in Visual Genome, of which almost 2 million are
parsed into this logical form. There are around
37,000 different relational terms in this set, of
which around 3,100 occur more than 10 times.
From this, a sizable number of relational interpre-
tation functions could be learned.

Before we move on, we note that in about
6.8% of the region descriptions there is more than
one object associated with an expression; as in the
example in Figure 6, where “desktop computers”
is resolved to four different bounding boxes. Such
configurations could be used to learn the function
of the plural morpheme. Looking at the expressions, there are also more than 1,000 instances each of
quantifiers and numerals such as “several”, “two”, “many”, which provides opportunity to learn their
meaning.
3.2.2 Sentences
We now turn to expressions that need to be evaluated relative to the image as a whole. Such expressions
can be constructed for example by plugging the nominal phrases from above into the sentence frame
“there is NPindef” (e.g., “there is a brown window” for Figure 4), to yield existential assertions. Nega-
tive examples (where the constructed sentence is false) can be selected by sampling an image that is not
annotated as containing an object of that type, again making use of an exhaustivity assumption.

Constructing examples in this way gives us control over the complexity of the expression, at the cost
of a loss in naturalness. Some of the corpora, however, also come with attested examples of expressions
that are meant to describe the image as a whole; COCO for example provides over 400,000 of such
captions. Figure 7 (left) gives an example of an image/caption pair.

How can we sample negative instances, where the image is not described by the caption? One method
is to simply sample an arbitrary image from the corpus: there will be a good chance that it does not fit
the caption. Too good a chance, perhaps, in that we are likely to hit an image that does not even contain
any of the entity types mentioned in the expression. To make the task harder, we can now make use of
one of the derived relations described above, namely a simiarity relation between images.

We looked at two ways of defining such a relation. Visual similarity (simvisI/I ) is the inverse of the
cosine distance in image representation space, using a pre-trained convolutional neural network (we
used VGG-19, Simonyan and Zisserman (2014), pre-trained on ImageNet Russakovsky et al. (2015)).
We compute content-based or semantic similarity (simsemI/I ) by vectorising the image annotation (in a
many-hot representation with the object types as dimensions), using SVD to project the resulting matrix
into a lower-dimensional space. Given our analogy between semantic models and images, with this we
then have a similarity relation between models, and we can select distractor images / models that are
more challenging to refute. Figure 7 shows distractors selected via visual (middle) and semantic (right)



Figure 8: Image described by paragraph (see text; left), and distractors (visual similarity, middle; seman-
tic similarity, right)

similarity. As this illustrates, quite fine-grained resolution abilities are required to recognise these as not
fitting the caption. (Man, but skis not on; man with skis on, but not standing.)

Captions from COCO are not finely grounded (no links between objects in the image and parts of
the expression). Flickr30kEntities provides this; for reasons of space, we do not show an example here.
We also skip over the wh-questions (with answers) that are available for COCO and Visual Genome,
noting only that they add an interesting generation challenge (if set up as open answer task; if set up as
multiple-choice task, this reduces to making a decision for a proposition).
3.2.3 Discourses
Finally, example (4) shows an image description paragraph for a Visual Genome image. The associated
image and two distractors are shown in Figure 8. The semantic challenge here when evaluating such a
paragraph relative to an image, at least when a probabilistic approach is taken, is that a decision must be
made on how to combine the uncertain judgements from each constituent sentence.

(4) The baseball player is swinging the bat. The ball is in the air. The dirt on the ground is light
brown. The baseball player is wearing blue pants. The other baseball players are watching from
The Dugout. The baseball player swinging the bat is wearing a dark-colored baseball hat. He’s
also wearing a bright red belt.

As this survey has shown, there is plenty of data available for learning grounded interpretation func-
tions for individual words (nouns, adjectives, prepositions), and for evaluating (or even learning) how
these functions must be put together to yield interpretations for larger expressions (NPs, sentences, and
even discourses).

4 Expressions and Implications
4.1 Images as Implicit Link between Expressions
Besides the question of whether a statement is true of a given situation, an interesting question often
is whether a statement follows from another one. There are various ways of tying down what exactly
“follows” may mean. A very general one is given by Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet (1990), who use
“A implies B” for cases where (the statement and acceptance of) A provides reason to also accept B.11

This covers cases where a proof can be given that connects B to A (where the relation would be syntactic
consequence, `), cases where an argument can be made that any model that makes A true will also
make B true (semantic consequence, |=), but also cases where A may just make B very plausible, given
common sense knowledge (which we might call common sense implicature, and denote with |=cs).

Here, we look at relations that we can take from the corpora and ask whether these can help us get
at these semantic implicature relations. We make use of the fact that for most of the image objects in

11This is also how later the influential “recognising textual entailment” challenge (Dagan et al., 2006) would describe the
relation, however also starting the tradition in natural language processing to overload the term “entailment” to cover all of what
could more generally be called “implication”. Young et al. (2014) call their task, defined via images as well and our inspiration
for the work described here, with a qualifier as “approximate entailment”.



the corpora, we have available more than one expression of the same type, e.g., more than one referring
expression, or more than one caption. In the following, we take a look at some examples, sorting the
discussion by the type of expressions that we pair.12 We will argue that to predict the presence (or not)
of an implicature relation, a different, complementary kind of lexical knowledge is required than for
evaluation relative to an image (or situation); cf. Marconi (1997).

4.2 Types of Relations
4.2.1 Same Level / Rephrasing
Example (5) shows referring expressions from RefCOCO (left) paired with another expression referring
to the same object (middle) and with one referring to a randomly sampled other object from the corpus.
The prediction task is to identify the left/middle pair as standing in an implicature relation, and the
left/right pair as not standing in this relation. (To put a practical spin on it, this could be seen as detecting
whether the second pair part could be a reformulation of the first, perhaps as response to a clarification
request.)

(5) a. right girl on floor || lady sitting on right | guy on right
b. woman || left person | pizza on bottom right
c. man trying to help with suitcase || man in jacket | very top zebra

Despite the brevity of the expressions, as this example indicates, this task seems to require quite detailed
lexical knowledge, for example detecting incompatiblity between “guy” and “girl” in (5-a), but compat-
iblity between “lady” and “girl”. (If this knowledge were available, perhaps a natural logic-type (Moss,
2015) approach could then be taken.) Creating this dataset only requires that several referring expres-
sions are available for the same object, and indeed RefCOCO for example provides on average 7.1 per
object, for a total of over 140,000 referring expressions.

We randomly sampled 60 instances of such pairings (balanced pos/neg) and presented each to three
workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk, asking for a semantic relatedness judgement (on a 4 step Likert-
scale). Using the majority label and binning at the middle of the scale, the accuracy is 0.68. This indicates
that while noisy, this method creates a recognisable semantic relation between these expressions.13

Example (6) shows similar pairings of captions, with the negative instance (the final part of each sub-
example) taken from a distractor image selected for semantic image similarity. As this illustrates, the task
only becomes harder, with the caption that is intended to be non-matching occasionally accidentally even
intuitively being compatible after all. (Crowd accuracy, henceforth AMT, with same setup as described
above: 0.63.)

(6) a. A woman with a painted face riding a skateboard indoors. || A woman with face paint on
standing on a skateboard. | There are men who are skateboarding down the trail.

b. Man and woman standing while others are seated looking at a monitor. || A man and woman
play a video game while others watch. | Two people standing in a living room with Wii
remotes in their hands.

4.2.2 More Specific / Entailment
Since some of the corpora overlap in their base image data, we can intersect the annotation and create
derived data sets. (7) shows examples of a caption from COCO (left) paired with an object from Visual
Genome (slotted into a “there is (a) ” frame for presentation) taken from the same image (middle),
and a randomly sampled object (right) in (7-a) and (7-b), and with region descriptions (also from Visual
Genome) in the other examples.

12Our inspiration for this approach comes from two sources. As mentioned, Young et al. (2014) used image captions to create
their “approximate entailment” data sets; our proposals here can be seen as a generalisation of this to other pairings. Further,
the original “natural language inference” dataset by Bowman et al. (2015) used captions as seeds, but had the entailments and
contradictions manually generated and not derived via image relations, as we do here.

13Note that the task was to judge pairs, not to decide between two hypotheses, which would presumably be a simpler task.



(7) a. A man wearing a black cap leaning against a fence getting ready to play baseball. || there is
(a) man | there is (a) cow

b. Rice, broccoli, and other food items sitting beside each other || there is (a) health foods |
there is (a) granite

c. A man playing Wii in a room || there is/are (a) a plant that sits on a desk | there is/are (a)
field covered in green grass

d. A woman is riding a wave on a surfboard. || there is/are (a) Woman with the surfboard. |
there is/are (a) Students sitting at their desks

Judging from these examples, quite detailed knowledge about situations and possible participants seems
to be required to predict these relations. (AMT accuracy caption/object: 0.58, caption/region: 0.6.)
4.2.3 More Detailed / Elaboration
Finally, (8) shows examples of a caption (from COCO) paired with a paragraph (from Visual Genome-
paragraphs) describing the same (middle) or another, but similar image. The task here is to detect whether
the extended description fits with the short description or not, which again seems to require quite detailed
knowledge about situations and likely sub-events. (AMT: 0.6.)

(8) two people lying in a bunk bed in a bedroom.
A boy and girl are sitting on bunk beds in a room. The boy is wearing a red shirt and dark pants.
The girl is wearing a gray shirt and blue jean pants. There is a green and pink blanket behind the
boy on the top bunk. The girl is sitting on a rolled up blanket. She is wearing red glasses on her
eyes.
A woman is sitting on a bed beside a little girl. She is wearing a sweater and black bottoms. The
woman has eyeglasses on her eyes. The girl is wearing a colorful jacket. The girl is looking at
a book that is opened on her lap. The bed is sitting against a white painted wall. There is a red
blanket on the bed.

Using this general recipe, further datasets can be created with other combinations, for example pairing
sets of region descriptions with further descriptions either from the same or from a different scene, or for
the task of predicting the number of distinct entities introduced by a sequence of region descriptions. For
reasons of space, we do not show examples here.

5 A Case Study: Model-Building for Predicting Entailment

Figure 9: A Retrieved Abstract Exemplar Situation

Entailment tasks, triggered by the aforementioned
“natural language inference” dataset (Bowman
et al., 2015) have in recent years become a sta-
ple NLP task. They are typically tackled with
very high-capacity machine learning models that
classify distributed representations of the candi-
date relata, e.g., as in (Devlin et al., 2018). With
the perspective developed here, we can liken such
approaches to the syntactic way of defining en-
tailment (`), in that these approaches only take
the surface form into account (and implicitly learn
and use the required common sense knowledge).

A semantic approach seems possible as well,
however. In its brute force form, it would implement the typical way in which semantic consequence
is defined, by quantification over all models. Here, this would mean testing, along the lines developed
in Section 3, whether all images (in a sub-corpus held for that purpose) that make the premise true also
make the hypothesis true. We try something else here, which is more like model-building (Bos, 2003),
for data of the type illustrated in (7) above.

The idea is as follows. Given the premise (in our case, always a caption), we retrieve a set of images



(other than that from which the caption was taken), via captions that are nearest neighbours in a text
embedding space (for which we used the “universal sentence encoder” by Cer et al. (2018)). That is, we
make use of a derived expression/expression relation, to create a relation between an expression and a set
of retrieved models. (One can think of these as situation exemplars stored in memory and retrieved via
their short descriptions.) Figure 9 shows such a retrieved model (abstracted away from the actual image
content, which is not used), for the trigger caption “An airplane flying through the sky on a cloudy day.”
and retrieved via its most similar caption “White and blue airplane flying in a grey sky.”.

We then test the candidate expressions (or rather, their “logical forms”, as given by Visual Genome)
against this set of models. For objects (as in (7-a) and (7-b) above), this checks whether an object
of the appropriate type is in the retrieved models; for relations, this additionally checks whether the
relation is also present. If the required types are present in all models, this would yield a score of 1.
We set a threshold (in our experiments, at 0.2), above which a positive decision is made. As baseline,
we use token overlap between premise and hypothesis for objects and intersection over union for the
longer region descriptions, and distance in the embedding space. We created 10,000 triples each for the
caption/object and the caption/region task.

The results in Table 1 indicate that this rather simple model captures cases that the baselines do not.
An example where this is the case is shown in (9); here the retrieved models seem to have provided the
entities (“umpire” and “jacket”) which are likely to be present in a baseball scene, but aren’t literally
mentioned in the premise.

Task Model Strg.Bsln Embd.Bsln Task Model Strg.Bsln Embd.Bsln
Captions / Objects 0.67 0.58 0.64 Captions / Regions 0.65 0.54 0.50

Table 1: Results for Predicting Entailment via model retrieval (and baselines)

(9) Baseball batter hitting ball while other players prepare to try and catch it. || jacket worn by umpire
| silverware on a napkin

This is clearly not more than a first proof-of-concept. We’ve included it here to motivate our tentative
conclusion that the perspective introduced in this paper might have value not only for deriving interesting
data sets, but also for tackling some of the tasks. In future work, we will explore methods that directly
predict image layouts [e.g., (Tan et al., 2018)], comparing them to direct prediction approaches and
evaluating whether the former methods offer a plus in interpretability through the step of predicting
abstract models.

6 Conclusions
Our goal with this paper was to show, with detailed examples and descriptive statistics, that language /
vision corpora can be a fertile hunting ground for semanticists interested in grounded lexical semantics.
There is data pairing various, ever more complex, kinds of expressions with image objects (either parts
of images, or images as a whole). Moreover, using these corpora, data sets can be derived that pair
expressions, where a semantic relation holds between the parts that is recognisable to naive annotators
(if not alway very clearly). As an example, we’ve used the perspective of treating images as models to
retrieve exemplar models via language descriptions (captions), and probe those for the likely presence of
entities and relations in a mentioned situation. It is our hope that this perspective might be useful to other
researchers, and with the code released with this paper, we invite everyone to ask their own questions of
the data, and to implement ideas on how to learn grounded interpretation.

Acknowledgements This work was done while I was at Bielefeld University and supported by the
Cluster of Excellence Cognitive Interaction Technology “CITEC” (EXC 277), which is funded by the
German Research Foundation (DFG). I thank Sina Zarrieß and the anonymous reviewers for comments.



References
Abzianidze, L., J. Bjerva, K. Evang, H. Haagsma, R. van Noord, P. Ludmann, D.-D. Nguyen, and J. Bos

(2017, April). The parallel meaning bank: Towards a multilingual corpus of translations annotated
with compositional meaning representations. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, Valencia, Spain,
pp. 242–247. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bos, J. (2003). Exploring model building for natural language understanding. In Workshop on Inference
in Computational Semantics (ICoS).

Bos, J., V. Basile, K. Evang, N. Venhuizen, and J. Bjerva (2017). The groningen meaning bank. In N. Ide
and J. Pustejovsky (Eds.), Handbook of Linguistic Annotation, Volume 2, pp. 463–496. Springer.

Bowman, S. R., G. Angeli, C. Potts, and C. D. Manning (2015). A large annotated corpus for learning
natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics.

Cer, D., Y. Yang, S.-y. Kong, N. Hua, N. Limtiaco, R. S. John, N. Constant, M. Guajardo-Cespedes,
S. Yuan, C. Tar, Y.-H. Sung, B. Strope, and R. Kurzweil (2018). Universal Sentence Encoder. ArXiv.

Chierchia, G. and S. McConnell-Ginet (1990). Meaning and Grammar: An Introduction to Semantics.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.

Cirik, V., T. Berg-kirkpatrick, and L.-p. Morency (2018). Using Syntax to Ground Referring Expressions
in Natural Images. In AAAI 2018.

Dagan, I., O. Glickman, and B. Magnini (2006). The pascal recognising textual entailment challenge.
In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Machine Learning Challenges: Evaluating
Predictive Uncertainty Visual Object Classification, and Recognizing Textual Entailment, MLCW’05,
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 177–190. Springer-Verlag.

Davies, E. R. (2012). Computer and Machine Vision: Theory, Algorithms, Practicalities (4th ed.). Am-
sterdam, Boston, Heidelberg, London: Elsevier.

Devlin, J., M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova (2018). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding. ArXiv.

Fellbaum, C. (Ed.) (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, USA: MIT Press.

Fine, K. (2017). A Theory of Truthmaker Content I: Conjunction, Disjunction and Negation. Journal of
Philosophical Logic 46(6), 625–674.

He, K., G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick (2017). Mask R-CNN. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).

Hürlimann, M. and J. Bos (2016). Combining Lexical and Spatial Knowledge to Predict Spatial Relations
between Objects in Images. In 5th Workshop on Vision and Language, Berlin, Germany, pp. 10–18.

Kazemzadeh, S., V. Ordonez, M. Matten, and T. L. Berg (2014). ReferItGame: Referring to Objects in
Photographs of Natural Scenes. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2014), Doha, Qatar, pp. 787–798.

Krause, J., J. Johnson, R. Krishna, and L. Fei-Fei (2017, January). A hierarchical approach for generating
descriptive image paragraphs. In Proceedings - 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition.



Krishna, R., Y. Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata, J. Kravitz, S. Chen, Y. Kalantidis, L.-J. Li, D. A.
Shamma, M. Bernstein, and L. Fei-Fei (2016). Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using
crowdsourced dense image annotations.

Lin, T.-Y., M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollr, and C. Zitnick (2014).
Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision ECCV 2014, Volume 8693, pp.
740–755. Springer International Publishing.

Mao, J., J. Huang, A. Toshev, O. Camburu, A. L. Yuille, and K. Murphy (2016, June). Generation and
comprehension of unambiguous object descriptions. In Proceedings of CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, USA.

Marconi, D. (1997). Lexical Competence. Cambridge, Mass., USA: MIT Press.

Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing
of Visual Information. San Francisco, USA: W.H. Freeman.

Moss, L. (2015). Natural logic. In S. Lappin and C. Fox (Eds.), Handbook of Contemporary Semantic
Theory 2nd edition. Wiley-Blackwell.

Plummer, B. A., L. Wang, C. M. Cervantes, J. C. Caicedo, J. Hockenmaier, and S. Lazebnik (2015).
Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer image-to-sentence models.
In Proceedings of ICCV.

Redmon, J. and A. Farhadi (2018). Yolov3: An incremental improvement. arXiv.

Russakovsky, O., J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla,
M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei (2015). ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision 115(3), 211–252.

Schlangen, D., S. Zarrieß, and C. Kennington (2016, August). Resolving references to objects in pho-
tographs using the words-as-classifiers model. In Proceedings of ACL 2016, Berlin, Germany.

Simonyan, K. and A. Zisserman (2014). Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recog-
nition. CoRR abs/1409.1556.

Tan, F., S. Feng, and V. Ordonez (2018). Text2Scene: Generating Abstract Scenes from Textual Descrip-
tions. ArXiv.

Young, P., A. Lai, M. Hodosh, and J. Hockenmaier (2014). From image descriptions to visual deno-
tations: New similarity metrics for semantic inference over event descriptions. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics 2.

Yu, L., P. Poirson, S. Yang, A. Berg, and B. T.L. (2016). Modeling context in referring expressions. In
Computer Vision ECCV 2016, Volume 9906 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer.


