




































Universal dependencies for Scottish Gaelic: syntax

Colin Batchelor
Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Cambridge, UK CB4 0WF

colin.r.batchelor@gmail.com

Abstract

We present universal dependencies for
Scottish Gaelic and a treebank of 1021
sentences (20 021 tokens) drawn from the
Annotated Reference Corpus Of Scottish
Gaelic (ARCOSG). The tokens are an-
notated for coarse part-of-speech, fine-
grained part-of-speech, syntactic features
and dependency relations. We discuss how
the annotations differ from the treebanks
developed for two other Celtic languages,
Irish and Breton, and in preliminary de-
pendency parsing experiments we obtain a
mean labelled attachment score of 0.792.
We also discuss some difficult cases for
future investigation, including cosubordi-
nation. The treebank is available, along
with documentation, from https://
universaldependencies.org/.

1 Introduction

Scottish Gaelic is an low-resourced language
which has hitherto lacked a robust parser, despite
the recent development of the Annotated Refer-
ence Corpus of Scottish Gaelic (ARCOSG) (Lamb
et al., 2016). Previous work (Batchelor, 2016)
has leveraged ARCOSG to produce a medium-
coverage categorial grammar but not a gold stan-
dard corpus that would enable the grammar to be
properly evaluated. In this work we fill this gap
by creating a dependency treebank for Scottish
Gaelic of similar size to the existing treebanks in
Irish (Lynn, 2016) and (Lynn and Foster, 2016)
and Breton (Tyers and Ravishankar, 2018). An

c© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

important advantage of the dependency grammar
approach is that the tools are better developed and
less closely tied to English than for combinatory
categorial grammar (CCG). Indeed, the universal
dependencies (UD) framework has been developed
to cover as wide a range of languages as possible,
and recent CoNLL shared tasks have been explic-
itly multilingual, for example the 2018 task which
focussed on extracting universal dependencies for
82 treebanks in 57 languages (Zeman et al., 2018).
Given a corpus in CoNLL format, the udpipe pack-
age (Straka and Straková, 2017) can be used to
train a tokeniser, a POS tagger and a dependency
parser. In this work we will concentrate on the last
of these and present preliminary results.

2 Scottish Gaelic

Scottish Gaelic, hereafter Gaelic, is a Celtic lan-
guage of the Goidelic family closely related to
Irish and Manx. It is spoken mainly in the High-
lands and islands of Scotland, in the cities of the
Central Belt and in Cape Breton in Canada. Its
usage has been declining since the Middle Ages,
when placename evidence attests its presence as
far southeast as Fife and even East Lothian (Gul-
lane, Innerwick and Ballencrieff all have Gaelic
etymologies) and according to the UNESCO At-
las of the World’s Languages in Danger it is “defi-
nitely endangered” (Moseley, 2010). Lamb (2003)
has published an accessible grammar of the lan-
guage, but for a fuller account see Cox (2017) and
for a short practical account focussing on contem-
porary usage see Ross et al. (2019).

The main electronic corpora for the language
are ARCOSG and Corpas na Gàidhlig ‘Corpus
of Gaelic’, part of the Digital Archive of Scottish
Gaelic (DASG) (University of Glasgow, 2019).

The usual word order is VSO, but periphrastic

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 7



constructions are very common and in contrast to
Irish the usual way of expressing that something
is taking place in the present is to use the verb bi
and the verbal noun, for example Tha mi a’ dol
‘I am at going’ for ‘I am going’. We will dis-
cuss other differences from Irish, mainly that cer-
tain constructions are much more common in one
language than the other, in more depth later on.
There are two genders (masculine and feminine),
three numbers (singular, plural and a separate dual
form for nouns) and four cases (nominative, voca-
tive, genitive and dative). Like the other Celtic lan-
guages Gaelic has conjugated prepositions such as
agam ‘at me’ and oirnn ‘on us’. These were al-
ready single words by the time of Old Irish (the
8th and 9th centuries CE) (Stifter, 2006). Both
Irish and Scottish Gaelic exhibit cosubordination
(Lamb, 2003). This is where the coordinator agus
is followed by a nominal subject and an adjecti-
val predicate or a small clause. Usually in Scottish
Gaelic the cosubordinated clause follows the main
clause, but it is not unusual in Irish to see it fronted.
We will discuss options for handling this later on.
Lastly, it is very common to express psychologi-
cal states by a combination of the verb bi, a noun
and two prepositional phrases, for example ‘I love
her’ is Tha gaol agam oirre ‘There is love at me on
her’.

3 Related work

The first work on a dependency treebank for Gaelic
was by Batchelor (2014) which predated the re-
lease of ARCOSG and was built from a tiny collec-
tion (82 sentences) of hand-picked sentences. At
the same time Lamb and Danso presented a part-
of-speech tagger for Gaelic based on ARCOSG
(Lamb and Danso, 2014). Subsequently Tyers
and Ravishankar (2018) have presented a Univer-
sal Dependencies treebank for Breton.

4 Corpus

ARCOSG is a corpus of 76 texts from a variety of
genres, including conversations, sports commen-
tary, fiction and news. Part of the context for
the development of ARCOSG is given in (Lamb,
1999) where Lamb describes the development of
the news reports and the language used on Radio
nan Gàidheal. The texts have been part-of-speech
tagged by hand according to a tagging scheme de-
scribed in (2014) and based on the PAROLE tagset
used by Uı́ Dhonnchadha (2009).

ARCOSG is made available in Brown Corpus
format. This is converted into CoNLL-U format
with a short Python script and the fine-grained
part-of-speech tags mapped to the coarse-grained
UD v2 tagset. A sample of the mapping is shown
in Table 1. The LEMMA field in the treebank is
populated using an extended version of the lem-
matiser described in Batchelor (2016). The FEATS
field is populated in the conversion process, largely
following the feature set for Irish (Lynn et al.,
2017). The corpus is broken into sentences on full
stops and sentence boundaries corrected in manual
postprocessing.

We use the texts in the following subcorpora:
narrative, news, fiction, formal prose and popu-
lar writing. We have initially excluded the con-
versation and interview subcorpora because of the
large fraction of single-token utterances. We also
exclude the sports subcorpus for the moment as it
largely consists of highly paratactic football com-
mentary. Table 2 gives an overview. 752 sen-
tences (25 593 tokens) remain to be added to the
corpus and 30 sentences (1043 tokens) are await-
ing a better treatment of cosubordination. Lastly
there are five sentences in the narrative subcorpus
which have a total of 5092 tokens between them.

5 Annotation

In this section we describe the process and look
at some special cases in the light of the Irish and
Breton treebanks.

5.1 Guidelines
We use the generic Universal Dependencies guide-
lines (Universal Dependencies contributors, 2016)
and refer to the Irish UD corpus (Lynn and Foster,
2016) and our own list of special cases1 in case of
doubt. There is a single human annotator, an expe-
rienced adult learner of Gaelic, but the tagset used
in ARCOSG is extremely rich, with well over 200
POS tags and marks for tense, case, number and
gender and hence does a great deal of disambigua-
tion. We follow Lynn et al. (2013) in marking up
a small portion of the corpus (around 1000 tokens
in this case) by hand and then iteratively training
MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2006) with the standard
settings on an annotated/checked part of the cor-
pus and using it to parse the unchecked part. We
1See guidelines.md and the documentation for the
python conversion scripts in https://github.com/
colinbatchelor/gdbank/releases/tag/v0.
2-alpha

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 8



ARCOSG UD Comments Examples
A* ADJ adjectives
Dd DET determiners seo ‘this’, ud ‘yon’
Dp* DET possessive pronouns mo ‘my’
Dq DET determiners gach ‘every’, a h-uile ‘every’
Cc CCONJ coordinators agus ‘and’, ach ‘but’, oir ‘for’
Cs SCONJ subordinators ged ‘although’, nuair ‘when’
F* PUNCT punctuation
I INTJ interjections O ‘oh’, Seadh ‘aye’, Uill ‘well’
M* NUM numbers (non-human series)
Nc* NOUN common nouns
Nf ADP fossilized nouns airson ‘for’, air feadh ‘throughout’
Nn* PROPN proper nouns
Nt PROPN toponyms
Nv NOUN verbal nouns lorg ’going’
Pp* PRON personal pronouns mi ‘I’
Pr* ADP conjugated prepositions orm ‘on me’, aige-san ‘at him’
Q* PART particles a (relativiser), cha (negative particle)
R* ADV adverbs a-mach ‘out’, cuideachd ‘also’
Sa PART aspectual markers a’, ag, ri
Sp ADP prepositions aig ‘at’
Td* DET articles an, na, nan ‘the’, ‘of the’
U* PART particles a (adverbialiser), a (vocative)
Uf NOUN fossilized nouns ’S urrainn ‘can’, ’S dòcha ‘maybe’
Um ADP ‘than’ na
Uo PART numerical prefix a naoi ‘nine’ (but see below for h-, n-, t-)
Up PROPN part of proper name Mac
Uq — interrogatives Dè ‘what’ (PRON), Ciamar ‘how’ (ADV)
V* VERB verb
W* AUX copula B’ ‘was’, ’sann (see below)
Xfe — foreign word X for running text, NOUN where foreign noun
Y NOUN abbreviation Mgr ‘Mr’, a BhBC ‘of the BBC’

Table 1: Mapping of the most important part-of-speech classes from ARCOSG to the UD coarse-grained tagset. The asterisk
in A*, for example, indicates that all of the tags beginning with A map on to ADJ.

proofread the trees, add them to the training data,
and iteratively improve the unchecked portion of
the corpus. We keep trees which feature cosubor-
dination in a separate file for future work.

5.2 Tokenisation

By and large we follow the tokenisation in AR-
COSG but we do have to make some adjustments
to match the UD scheme. Firstly, ARCOSG treats
a number of multiword expressions such as place-
names and the prepositions ann an, anns an, ‘in’,
‘in the’ and variants as a single token. We reto-
kenise these on whitespace and assign, for the mo-
ment, the same part-of-speech tag to all of them.
Secondly the prefixes h-, n- and t-, which are in-

separable parts of the word written without a hy-
phen in Irish, are treated as independent tokens
with type Uo. These we unite with the tokens that
follow them into a single token. There is a small
number of multitoken compound prepositions that
according to ARCOSG are three tokens, including
a punctuation mark, for example a-rèir ‘according
to’, which we collapse into a single token.

In addition we have to make some assumptions
about reconstructing the original text, which is ab-
sent from the corpus. To this end we use the Gaelic
Orthographic Conventions (GOC) ((SQA), 2009)
for consistency in reconstructing spacing, but don’t
apply any other corrections. We retain spaces af-
ter a’, b’, d’, m’, th’ and bh’. If an elided a’ or

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 9



Subcorpus # sentences Mean # tokens Longest Shortest
Fiction 397 17.0 61 2
Formal prose 120 24.9 113 5
News 167 22.2 52 7
Narrative 132 18.2 112 3
Popular writing 205 20.4 59 4

Table 2: Overview of the subset of ARCOSG in the treebank.

ag before a verbal noun is indicated by ’, this is
combined with the following token.

We make limited use of UD’s word–token dis-
tinction at present. The Irish and Breton tree-
banks differ on how to treat conjugated preposi-
tions, with Breton dividing the single token ganto
‘with them’ into two words, gant and o, and Irish
keeping orm ‘on me’ as a single word rather than
dividing it into ar and mé. We follow the Irish ex-
ample, but do divide tokens that have been tagged
as fused tokens by ARCOSG. One example of
this is cuimhneam ‘memory at me’, which has the
POS Ncsfn+Pr1s (singular feminine common
noun and first person singular conjugated prepo-
sition). In this case we divide it into the two words
cuimhne and agam. There are currently ten exam-
ples of this in the treebank.

5.3 Personal names

Thàinig Mac an Deòir gu Àrnol
VERB PROPN DET PROPN ADP NOUN
V-s Up Tdsmg Nn Sp Nt
came son of the Dewar to Arnol

nsubj flat

flat

case

obl

root

Figure 1: ‘Dewar came to Arnol’ (part of tree pw05 017),
showing how compound proper names are handled.

We treat personal names, following the UD v2
guidelines, as a flat structure even in the case of
surnames such as Mac an Deòir ‘Dewar’ that have
internal grammatical structure (Fig. 1).

5.4 Copular constructions

An important use of the fixed relation is for the
‘dummy’ pronouns e and ann in the copular con-
structions ’s e, b’ e, ’s ann and b’ ann, which are
sometimes written as a single word. Two examples

are given in Fig. 2. ’S e (or in this case ’S i) intro-
duces an NP, and ’S ann (or ’Sann) is used for other
sorts of constituent, here an Ìle, ‘in Islay’. The ex-
pression that follows the dummy pronoun as being
the root of the clause, and the expression that fol-
lows that as the subject. It may be a definite NP, in
which case we use the relation nsubj, or clausal,
where we use csubj:cop. This is broadly sim-
ilar to the Irish treebank except that Irish does not
usually have the dummy pronouns.

5.5 The verbal noun and inversion structures

The verbal noun is intermediate between an
archetypal verb and an archetypal noun. In some
ways it behaves like a noun. It can be qualified
by an adjective preceding it, and in progressive
tenses, the NPs governed by a verbal noun were
historically always in the genitive, however Ross
et al. (2019) say that the genitive ‘is no longer re-
quired’ for indefinite singular nouns in these cases.
Equally, it is part of a clause. In the Irish tree-
bank verbal nouns are tagged as NOUN and treated
as xcomp (externally-controlled clausal comple-
ments) of the controlling verb. Conversely in
the Breton treebank they are tagged as VERB and
treated as the root, with what would be the con-
trolling verb in Irish treated as aux (an auxiliary).
The approach where the verbal noun is tagged as
a NOUN and the controlling verb as AUX is disal-
lowed by the validation script. We have chosen
to follow the Irish scheme, though these contrast-
ing approaches, shown in Figure 3, both have their
merits.

The two main ways of indicating the passive in
Scottish Gaelic are synthetic: Rugadh is thogadh
mi ‘I was born and raised’ (Fig. 4) and analytic:
Chaidh a’ nighean a lorg mu ochd uairean a-raoir.
‘The girl was found about eight o’clock last night’.
In the latter case we treat the subject nighean as a
dependent of the verbal noun lorg. The root of the
clause is the verb Chaidh ‘went’. This is shown
in Fig. 5. This is different from the approach in

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 10



’S ann an Ìle rugadh mi
AUX PRON ADP PROPN VERB PRON
Wp-i Pr3sm Sp Nt V-h Pp1s
COP DUMMY in Islay was born I

fixed case

root
cop

csubj:cop nsubj

’S i Mòrag a rinn a’ bhanais
AUX PRON PROPN PART VERB DET NOUN
Wp-i Pp3sf Nn-fn Qa Tdsf V-s Ncsfn
COP DUMMY Morag that did the wedding

cop

fixed

root

csubj:cop

mark

obj

det

Figure 2: Dependency trees for ‘It was in Islay that I was born’ and ‘It was Morag who had the wedding’.

Lenn a reas Lenaig al levr
VERB PART AUX PROPN DET NOUN
vblex vpart vblex np det n

read PART AUX Lenaig the book

aux

aux

nsubj

obj

det

root

Bha Lenaig a’ leughadh an leabhair
VERB PROPN PART NOUN DET NOUN
V-s Nn-fn Sa Nv Tdsmg Ncsmg
was Lenaig ASP reading the book

nsubj case

xcomp

obj

det

root

Figure 3: Dependency trees for ‘Lenaig read the book’ in the
Breton (sentence ID grammar.vislcg.txt:28:654) and ‘Lenaig
was reading the book’ in the Gaelic approach.

English where the word ‘was’ is treated as an aux-
iliary and the verb ‘found’ treated as the root, and
of course from the Breton example above, but is
identical to the other ‘inversion’ structures in Scot-
tish Gaelic, where the object goes before the ver-
bal noun (Ross et al., 2019), for example obliga-
tion: Feumaidh mi cofaidh òl ‘I must drink cof-
fee’, or possibility: Is urrainn dhuinn an duine a
chuideachadh ‘We can help the person’.

Rugadh is thogadh mi
VERB CCONJ VERB PRON
V-h Cc V-h Pp1s

was born and was raised I

nsubj

cc

conj

root

Figure 4: Dependency tree for ‘I was born and raised’ (ana-
lytic passive).

5.6 Numbers

As in Irish, there are two sets of cardinal num-
bers, one for people and the other for everything
else. In ARCOSG triùir ‘three people’ is tagged
as a noun (Ncsfn), and triùir mhac ‘three sons’
as Ncsfn Ncpmg. For this reason we treat triùir
as the content word and mhac as a modifier. This
is one of the many non-possessive constructions in
Gaelic where a noun in the genitive modifies an-
other noun, so we do not follow Breton in using
the nmod:poss relation in these cases. Cardi-
nal numbers on the other hand are tagged as Mc
and we treat them as modifying their nominal head
(nummod) unless they are the subject, object or
oblique argument. See Figure 7 for examples.

5.7 Cosubordination

Cosubordination is an important grammatical phe-
nomenon in Gaelic, found in all registers, and it is
not clear how to cover it from the UD guidelines.
Here is an example, a simplified version of sen-

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 11



Chaidh a’ nighean a lorg mu ochd uairean a-raoir
VERB DET NOUN PART VERB ADP NUM NOUN ADV
V-s Tdsf Ncsfn Ug Nv Sp Mc Ncpfd Rt
went the girl AGREEMENT found about eight o’ clock last night

mark

xcomp

det

obj

obl
root

case

nummod

advmod

Figure 5: Dependency tree for ‘The girl was found about eight o’ clock last night’ (analytic passive, simplified version of
ns10 021 in the as-yet unchecked part of the corpus).

Feumaidh mi cofaidh òl
VERB PRON NOUN NOUN
V-f Pp1s Ncsmn Nv
must I coffee drink

nsubj obj

xcomp
root

Is urrainn dhuinn an duine a chuideachadh
AUX NOUN PRON DET NOUN PART NOUN
Wp-i Uf Pr1p Tdsmn Ncsmn Ug Nv
COP mus to-us the person AGREEMENT help

cop obl det

obj

mark

xcomp

root

Figure 6: Dependency trees for inversion structures (Ross et al., 2019): ‘I must drink coffee’ and ‘We can help the person’.

triùir mhac
NOUN NOUN
Ncsmn Ncsmg

three son

nmod

Dà bhliadhna deug
NUM NOUN NUM
Mc Ncsfn Mc
two year ten

nummod

root

nummod

Figure 7: Contrasting treatments of personal numbers (left,
from n05 009) and impersonal numbers (right, f08 036).

tence n05 004: Chaidh e air chall ann an ceò, ’s e
’g iasgach. ‘He went missing in the fog when he
was fishing’, or more literally ‘He went missing in
the fog, and he fishing’.

We illustrate two approaches in Figure 8. The
first one is to use the adnominal clause modifier
(acl) relation as in the depictive example in the
UD guidelines ‘She entered the room sad’. This

introduces a non-projective arc between the words
e ‘he’ in each clause. The analogous sentence in
English is projective because of SVO word order
instead of VSO. It would perhaps be clearer to sub-
class the pertinent relations as conj:cosub and
acl:cosub. The second approach is to assume
that the word bha has been elided. This has two
advantages: firstly clear UD guidelines, indicating
that the correct thing to do is to treat e as a conju-
gate of the root verb Chaidh ‘went’ and connect it
to the verbal noun with the orphan relation, and
secondly maintaining a projective structure. And
yet it is not obvious that cosubordination actually
is ellipsis. One argument that it isn’t is that while
in Gaelic the cosubordinate clause usually appears
after the main clause, it is not uncommon in Irish
to see preposed cosubordinate clauses, for example
the phrase Agus mé óg ‘When I was young’.

The chief drawback of the depictive approach as
opposed to the elliptical is non-projectivity, but we

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 12



Chaidh e air chall ann an ceò , ’s e ’g iasgach
VERB PRON ADP NOUN ADP ADP NOUN PUNCT CCONJ PRON ADP NOUN
V-s Pp3sm Sa Nv Sp Sp Ncsmd Fi Cc Pp3sm Sa Nv
went he ASP lost in mist , and he ASP fishing

acl:cosub

case

conj:cosub

punct

obl

case

flat

obl

casensubj cc

root

Chaidh e air chall ann an ceò , ’s e ’g iasgach
VERB PRON ADP NOUN ADP ADP NOUN PUNCT CCONJ PRON ADP NOUN
V-s Pp3sm Sa Nv Sp Sp Ncsmd Fi Cc Pp3sm Sa Nv
went he ASP lost in mist , and he ASP fishing

orphan

case

conj

punct

obl

case

flat

obl

casensubj cc

root

Figure 8: Two approaches to cosubordination. (above) Depictive (below) elliptical.

feel that it is better in terms both of representing
the language as it is found in all registers, and in
the specificity of the relation used: acl as opposed
to the more generic orphan. A full investigation
of how common non-projectivity is in the treebank
as a whole should help decide how much weight to
place on projectivity as a criterion for annotation
choices.

6 Experiments

Transition system LAS
projective 0.796 [0.752, 0.839]
swap (non-projective) 0.789 [0.747, 0.825]
link2 (non-projective) 0.792 [0.750, 0.835]

Table 3: Labelled-attachment scores (LAS) for parsing the
treebank with different transition systems for udpipe’s parsito
parser. The LAS are the mean values from ten-fold cross-
validation. There were 1021 sentences and 20 031 words.

In this section we examine briefly how learnable
the annotation scheme is by a dependency parser
and the effects of different parsing algorithms. A

fuller account awaits a larger treebank, which on
average will have longer sentences. Because of the
small size of the corpus we use ten-fold cross vali-
dation. We use udpipe’s parsito parser and MaltE-
val (Nilsson and Nivre, 2008), both with the de-
fault settings. Table 3 gives the ten-fold cross-
validated labelled-attachment scores (LAS) for the
three transition systems, one projective and two
non-projective. We find that the default, projec-
tive transition system performs best, with a mean
LAS of 0.796, but the three are very similar, and
the scores may be flattered by the relatively short
mean sentence length (19.6 words). These scores
are comparable to the scores for much larger tree-
banks given by Nivre and Fang (2017).

7 Conclusions and future work

This is the first reasonably-sized dependency tree-
bank of Scottish Gaelic and the first demonstration
of a fast parser for the language. The treebank can
also be used for tokenisation and part-of-speech
tagging using udpipe, though as mentioned before

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 13



the tokenisation scheme is different from that used
in ARCOSG.

The treebank presented here is not quite ready
for an official release, despite its passing the vali-
dation script. Nonetheless a significant part of the
treebanking process, annotating a part-of-speech
corpus with lemmas, universal part-of-speech tags,
syntactic features and dependency relations, has
been achieved. A substantial part of ARCOSG
has not been covered in this work—the conver-
sation, sport and interview subcorpora, and five
of the texts in the narrative subcorpus. There are
also over 750 trees that are not yet in the treebank
but they will be processed in due course. Lastly,
given the close relation between the two languages
and that the annotation scheme presented here is as
close as possible to the Irish one, it would be very
interesting to repeat the parsing experiments on a
combined Irish and Scottish Gaelic corpus.

References
Batchelor, Colin. 2014. gdbank: The beginnings of

a corpus of dependency structures and type-logical
grammar in Scottish Gaelic. In Proceedings of the
First Celtic Language Technology Workshop, pages
60–65, Dublin, Ireland, August. Association for
Computational Linguistics and Dublin City Univer-
sity.

Batchelor, Colin. 2016. Automatic derivation of cate-
gorial grammar from a part-of-speech-tagged corpus
in Scottish Gaelic. In Actes de la conférence con-
jointe JEP-TALN-RECITAL 2016, volume 6 : CLTW,
Paris, France, July.

Cox, Richard A. V. 2017. Geàrr-Ghràmar na
Gàidhlig. Clann Tuirc, Tigh a’ Mhaide, Ceann
Drochaid, Alba.

Lamb, William and Samuel Danso. 2014. Develop-
ing an Automatic Part-of-Speech Tagger for Scottish
Gaelic. In Proceedings of the First Celtic Language
Technology Workshop, pages 1–5, Dublin, Ireland,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics
and Dublin City University.

Lamb, William, Sharon Arbuthnot, Susanna Naismith,
and Samuel Danso. 2016. Annotated Reference
Corpus of Scottish Gaelic (ARCOSG), 1997–2016
[dataset]. Technical report, University of Edin-
burgh; School of Literatures, Languages and Cul-
tures; Celtic and Scottish Studies. http://dx.
doi.org/10.7488/ds/1411.

Lamb, William. 1999. A diachronic account of Gaelic
news-speak: The development and expansion of a
register. Scottish Gaelic Studies, XIX:141–171.

Lamb, William. 2003. Scottish Gaelic, 2nd edn. Lin-
com Europa, Munich, Germany.

Lynn, Teresa and Jennifer Foster. 2016. Universal De-
pendencies for Irish. In Actes de la conférence con-
jointe JEP-TALN-RECITAL 2016, volume 6 : CLTW,
Paris, France, July.

Lynn, Teresa, Jennifer Foster, and Mark Dras. 2013.
Working with a small dataset - semi-supervised
dependency parsing for Irish. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages 1–11, Seat-
tle, Washington, USA, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Lynn, Teresa, Jennifer Foster, and Mark Dras. 2017.
Morphological Features of the Irish Universal De-
pendency Treebank. In TLT 2017: Proceedings of
the 15th International Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories, Aachen, Germany.

Lynn, Teresa. 2016. Irish Dependency Treebanking
and Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Dublin City University
and Macquarie University.

Moseley, Christopher, editor. 2010. Atlas of the
World’s Languages in Danger. UNESCO Publish-
ing, Paris, 3rd edition.

Naismith, Susanna and William Lamb. 2014. Scot-
tish Gaelic Part-of-Speech Annotation Guidelines.
Celtic and Scottish Studies, University of Edinburgh.

Nilsson, Jens and Joakim Nivre. 2008. MaltEval:
an evaluation and visualization tool for dependency
parsing. In LREC 2008.

Nivre, Joakim and Chiao-Ting Fang. 2017. Univer-
sal dependency evaluation. In Proceedings of the
NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependen-
cies (UDW 2017), pages 86–95, Gothenburg, Swe-
den, May. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Nivre, Joakim, Johan Hall, and Jens Nilsson. 2006.
MaltParser: A data-driven parser-generator for de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the Fifth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’06), Genoa, Italy, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Ross, Susan, Mark McConville, Wilson McLeod, and
Richard Cox. 2019. Stiùireadh Gràmair. https:
//dasg.ac.uk/grammar/grammar.pdf, ac-
cessed 23 May 2019.

(SQA), Scottish Qualifications Authority. 2009. Gaelic
Orthographic Conventions. Scottish Qualifications
Authority, Dalkeith.

Stifter, David. 2006. Sengoidelc: Old Irish for be-
ginners. Syracuse University Press, Syracuse, New
York.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 14



Straka, Milan and Jana Straková. 2017. Tokenizing,
pos tagging, lemmatizing and parsing ud 2.0 with
udpipe. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared
Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Univer-
sal Dependencies, pages 88–99, Vancouver, Canada,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Tyers, Francis M. and Vinit Ravishankar. 2018. A pro-
totype dependency treebank for Breton. In Actes de
la conférence Traitement Automatique de la Langue-
Naturelle, TALN 2018 : Volume 1 : Articles longs,
articles courts de TALN, pages 197–204, Rennes,
France, May.

Uı́ Dhonnchadha, Elaine. 2009. Part-of-speech tag-
ging and partial parsing for Irish using finite-state
transducers and constraint grammar. Ph.D. thesis,
Dublin City University.

Universal Dependencies contributors.
2016. UD Guidelines, https://
universaldependencies.org/
guidelines.html. Accessed 9 July 2019.

University of Glasgow. 2019. Corpas na Gàidhlig, Dig-
ital Archive of Scottish Gaelic (DASG), https://
dasg.ac.uk/corpus/. Accessed 9 July 2019.

Zeman, Daniel, Jan Hajič, Martin Popel, Martin Pot-
thast, Milan Straka, Filip Ginter, Joakim Nivre, and
Slav Petrov. 2018. CoNLL 2018 shared task: Mul-
tilingual parsing from raw text to universal depen-
dencies. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2018 Shared
Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Univer-
sal Dependencies, pages 1–21, Brussels, Belgium,
October. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 15


