



















































Studying Laws of Semantic Divergence across Languages using Cognate Sets


Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Computational Approaches to Historical Language Change, pages 161–166
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

161

Studying Laws of Semantic Divergence across Languages
using Cognate Sets

Ana Sabina Uban, Alina Maria Ciobanu, and Liviu P. Dinu

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science,
Human Language Technologies Research Center,

University of Bucharest

ana.uban@gmail.com, alina.ciobanu@my.fmi.unibuc.ro,
liviu.p.dinu@gmail.com

Abstract

Semantic divergence in related languages is
a key concern of historical linguistics. Intra-
lingual semantic shift has been previously
studied in computational linguistics, but it can
only provide a limited picture of the evolution
of word meanings, which often develop in a
multilingual environment. In this paper we
investigate semantic change across languages
by measuring the semantic distance of cog-
nate words in multiple languages. By com-
paring current meanings of cognates in differ-
ent languages, we hope to uncover informa-
tion about their previous meanings, and about
how they diverged within their respective lan-
guages from their common original etymon.
We further study the properties of the seman-
tic divergence of cognates, by analyzing how
features of the words, such as frequency and
polysemy, are related to their shift in meaning,
and thus take the first steps towards formulat-
ing laws of cross-lingual semantic change.

1 Introduction and Related Work

Semantic change – that is, change in the mean-
ing of individual words (Campbell, 1998) – is
a continuous, inevitable process stemming from
numerous reasons and influenced by various fac-
tors. Words are continuously changing, with new
senses emerging all the time. Campbell (1998)
presents no less than 11 types of semantic change,
that are generally classified in two wide cate-
gories: narrowing and widening.

In recent years, multiple computational linguis-
tic studies have focused on the issue of semantic
change, tracking the shift in the meaning of words
by looking at their usage across time in corpora
dating from different time periods. More than this,
computational linguists have also tried to system-
atically analyze the principles describing seman-
tic change hypothesized by linguists (such as the

law of parallel change and the law of differen-
tiation (Xu and Kemp, 2015)), or even proposed
new statistical laws of semantic change, based on
empirical observations, such as the law of con-
formity (stating that polysemy is positively corre-
lated with semantic change), the law of innovation
(according to which word frequency is negatively
correlated with semantic change) (Hamilton et al.,
2016), or the law of prototypicality (according
to which prototypicality is negatively correlated
with semantic change) (Dubossarsky et al., 2015).
More recently, Dubossarsky et al. (2017) revisited
some of the semantic change laws proposed in pre-
vious literature, claiming that a more rigorous con-
sideration of control conditions when modelling
these laws leads to the conclusion that they are
weaker or less reliable than reported. More exten-
sive surveys of computational studies relating to
semantic change have been conducted by Kutuzov
et al. (2018); Tahmasebi et al. (2018).

All previous computational studies on lexical
semantic change have, to our knowledge, only
looked at the semantic change of the words within
one language. However, words do not evolve only
in their own language in isolation, but are rather
inherited and borrowed between and across lan-
guages.

Cognates are words in sister languages (lan-
guages descending from a common ancestor) with
a common proto-word. For example, the Ro-
manian word victorie and the Italian word vitto-
ria are cognates, as they both descend from the
Latin word victoria (meaning victory) – see Fig-
ure 1. In most cases, cognates have preserved
similar meanings across languages, but there are
also exceptions. These are called deceptive cog-
nates or, more commonly, false friends. Here we
use the definition of cognates that refers to words
with similar appearance and some common ety-
mology, and use true cognates to refer to cognates



162

which also have a common meaning, and decep-
tive cognates or false friends to refer to cognate
pairs which do not have the same meaning (any-
more).

Dominguez and Nerlich (2002) distinguish be-
tween chance false friends, which have similar
form but different etymologies as well as differ-
ent meanings in different languages, and semantic
false friends, which share the etymological origin,
but their meanings differ (to some extent) in dif-
ferent languages. In this study we focus on the
latter, which we consider more relevant from the
point of view of semantic change since, in prin-
ciple, they begin with a common meaning then di-
verge, to a lower or higher degree, while often pre-
serving some common meaning, whereas chance
false friends usually have entirely distinct mean-
ings.

Most linguists found structural and psycholog-
ical factors to be the main cause of semantic
change, but the evolution of technology and cul-
tural and social changes are not to be omitted.
Moreover, when a word enters a new language,
features specific to that particular language can af-
fect the way it is used and contribute to shaping its
meaning through time: existing words in the same
language, as well as socio-cultural and historical
factors etc. The evolution of cognate words in
different languages can be seen as a collection of
different parallel histories of the proto-word from
its entering the new languages to its current state.
Based on this view, we propose a novel approach
for studying semantic change: instead of compar-
ing monolingual texts from different time periods
as ways to track meanings of words at different
stages in time - we compare present meanings of
cognate words across different languages, viewing
them as snapshots in time of each of the word’s
different histories of evolution.

Related to our task, there have been a number
of previous studies attempting to automatically ex-
tract pairs of true cognates and false friends from
corpora or from dictionaries. Most methods are
based either on orthographic and phonetic similar-
ity, or require large parallel corpora or dictionaries
(Inkpen et al., 2005; Nakov et al., 2009; Chen and
Skiena, 2016; St Arnaud et al., 2017). There have
been few previous studies using word embeddings
for the detection of false friends or cognate words,
usually using simple methods on only one or two
pairs of languages (Torres and Aluı́sio, 2011; Cas-

tro et al., 2018).
Uban et al. (2019) propose a method for iden-

tifying and correcting false friends, as well as de-
fine a measure of their “falseness”, using cross-
lingual word embeddings. We base our study on
the method proposed here, and take it further by
analyzing the properties of semantic divergence
as they relate to different properties of the words,
across five Romance languages, as well as En-
glish. Similarly to how Hamilton et al. (2016) for-
mulate statistical laws of semantic change within
one language, we propose studying the same laws
cross-lingually, from the point of view of cognate
semantic divergence.

In the following sections, we first present the
method for measuring cognate semantic distance
in Section 2, then in Section 3 provide details on
our experiments for characterizing the properties
of semantic change across languages using cog-
nates.

victoria (lat.)

victorie (ro.)
ety
mo
n etymon

cognates vittoria (it.)

Figure 1: Example of cognates and their common an-
cestor.

2 Semantic Divergence of Cognates

2.1 Cross-lingual Word Embeddings

Word embeddings are vectorial representations of
words in a continuous space, built by training a
model to predict the occurrence of a target word in
a text corpus given its context, and can be used as
representations of word meaning: words that are
similar semantically appear close together in the
embedding space.

In our study we make use of word embed-
dings computed using the FastText algorithm, pre-
trained on Wikipedia for the six languages in ques-
tion. The vectors have 300 dimensions, and were
obtained using the skip-gram model described by
Bojanowski et al. (2016) with default parameters.
These pre-trained embeddings are suitable for our
study since: they are trained on large amounts
of text, which minimizes the amount of noise in
the vectors, making them good approximators of
word meanings; and they are trained on text that
is relatively uniform in style and topic - ensuring



163

Romanian French Italian Spanish Portuguese Latin ancestor
arhitect architecte architetto arquitecto arquiteto architectus

Table 1: An example of a cognate set: “architect” in Romance languages.

any differences in the structure of the embedding
spaces of different languages is dependent on the
language, rather than an artifact of topic or genre.
Nevertheless, even high quality embeddings can
be noisy or biased and this should be kept in mind
when interpreting the results of our experiments.

To compute the semantic divergence of cog-
nates across sister languages, we need to obtain
a multilingual semantic space, which is shared be-
tween the cognates. Having the representations of
both cognates in the same semantic space, we can
then compute the semantic distance between them
using their vectorial representations in this space.
For a given pair of languages among the six con-
sidered, we can then accomplish this following the
steps below:
Step 1. Obtain word embeddings for each of the
two languages.
Step 2. Obtain a shared embedding space, com-
mon to the two languages. This is accomplished
using an alignment algorithm, which consists of
finding a linear transformation between the two
spaces that on average optimally transforms each
vector in one embedding space into a vector in the
second embedding space, minimizing the distance
between a few seed word pairs (which are assumed
to have the same meaning), based on a small bilin-
gual dictionary. The linear nature of the trans-
formation guarantees distances between words in
the original spaces (within each language) are pre-
served. For our purposes, we use the publicly
available FastText multilingual word embeddings
pre-aligned in a common vector space (Conneau
et al., 2017).1

Step 3. Compute the semantic distance for the pair
of cognates in the two languages, using a vectorial
distance (we chose cosine distance) on their corre-
sponding vectors in the shared embedding space.

2.2 Dataset

As our data source, we use the list of cognate sets
in Romance languages proposed by Ciobanu and
Dinu (2014). It contains 3,218 complete cognate
sets in Romanian, French, Italian, Spanish and

1https://github.com/facebookresearch/MUSE

Portuguese, along with their Latin common ances-
tors, extracted from online etymology dictionar-
ies. A subset of 305 of these sets also contains the
corresponding cognate (in the broad sense, since
these are mostly borrowings) in English.

One complete example of a cognate set for the
word “architect” in the Romance languages is il-
lustrated in Table 1.

2.3 Deceptive Cognates and Falseness
The multilingual embedding spaces as defined
above can be used to measure the semantic dis-
tances between cognates in order to detect pairs
of false friends, which are simply defined as pairs
of cognates which do not share the same mean-
ing. More specifically, following the false friends
detection and correction algorithm of Uban et al.
(2019), we consider a pair of cognates to be a
false friend pair if in the shared semantic space,
there exists a word in the second language which
is semantically closer to the original word than its
cognate in that language (in other words, the cog-
nate is not the optimal translation). The arithmetic
difference between the semantic distance between
these words and the semantic distance between the
cognates will be used as a measure of the falseness
of the false friend.

Accuracy Precision Recall
EN-ES 76.58 63.88 88.46
ES-IT 75.80 41.66 54.05
ES-PT 82.10 40.0 42.85
EN-FR 77.09 57.89 94.28
FR-IT 74.16 32.81 65.62
FR-ES 73.03 33.89 69.96
EN-IT 73.07 33.76 83.87
IT-PT 76.14 29.16 43.75
EN-PT 77.25 59.81 86.48

Table 2: Performance for all language pairs using
WordNet as gold standard.

Uban et al. (2019) also perform an evaluation
of the introduced false friends detection algorithm
using multilingual WordNet as a gold standard. In
order to provide more context for the method that
we employ in our study, we briefly reiterate their
results. A pair of words with common etymology
are considered true cognates if they belong to the



164

same WordNet synset (are synonyms), and false
friends if they are not synonyms. Using this gold
standard, the obtained measured accuracy falls be-
tween 74% and 82%, depending on the language
pair considered. Table 2 presents a breakdown of
the obtained performance per language pair con-
sidered (limited to languages available in multilin-
gual WordNet).

We select a few results of the algorithm to show
in Table 3, containing examples of extracted false
friends, along with the suggested correction and
the computed degree of falseness. Each row in
the table contains a pair of false cognates, among
which one is chosen as a reference, and corrected
so as to obtain its true translation in the second
language using the correction algorithm.

Cognate False Correc- False-
Friend tion ness

long (FR) luengo (ES) largo 0.50
face (FR) faz (ES) cara 0.39
change(FR) caer (ES) cambia 0.46
stânga (RO) stanco (IT) destra 0.52
tânăr (RO) tenero (IT) giovane 0.41
inimă (RO) anima (IT) cuore 0.13
amic (RO) amico (IT) amichetto 0.04

Table 3: Extracted false friends and falseness.

3 Laws of Cross-lingual Semantic
Divergence

We use the measure of falseness of a deceptive
cognate pair to quantify the semantic shift between
the meanings of a word derived from the same
etymon in different languages. We further pro-
pose analyzing how the properties of frequency
and polysemy of a word relate to semantic shift,
and, analogously to what Hamilton et al. (2016)
do for monolingual semantic change, we aim to
move towards uncovering statistical laws of se-
mantic change across languages.

We first define a measure of the frequency of a
word, as well as a measure of its polysemy. Fur-
ther, we try to correlate these measures of fre-
quency and polysemy with the falseness measure
defined in the previous sections. At this step, we

ES PT IT FR EN
ES - -23.4 -31.5 -39.8 -20.9
PT -42.0 - -37.7 -34.2 -31.4
IT -29.5 -28.5 - -33.9 -36.2
FR -25.9 -16.3 -23.3 - -31.9
EN -27.7 -39.3 -39.7 -39.2 -

Table 4: Correlations of frequency with falseness.

discard all cognate pairs that, according to the
false friend detection algorithm, are true cognates,
and focus only on the deceptive cognates. On av-
erage across all language pairs, 37% of the cog-
nate pairs in our dataset are found as deceptive
cognates. Moreover, we validate these results us-
ing multilingual WordNet, and further select only
pairs which are confirmed to be deceptive cognates
as such: two cognates are considered to be true
cognates if they are synonyms according to Word-
Net, and are considered to be deceptive cognates
otherwise. It should be noted that having to use
WordNet limits us to languages for which Word-
Net is available (excluding Romanian).

Although our approach is very similar to the one
proposed by Hamilton et al. (2016), an important
difference should be noted: while the authors of
the monolingual study correlate the magnitude of
the shift of meaning in a word to its frequency
and polysemy prior to the change in meaning, our
method looks at the properties of words after the
meaning shift has already occurred, presumably
from the original meaning of the proto-word they
derive from to their current meanings in their re-
spective languages.

3.1 Word Frequency and Semantic
Divergence

For measuring frequency, we use the rankings of
words based on their frequency in the corpus used
to build the embeddings, which are readily avail-
able in the FastText embeddings that we use out
of the box. The most frequent words will be as-
sociated with the lowest ranks. We normalize the
absolute rank of a word dividing by the total num-
ber of words in its language, obtaining a relative
rank ranging from 0 to 1 (with 0 corresponding to
the most frequent words and 1 to the rarest).

For each pair of languages in a cognate set,
we compute the Spearman correlation between the
frequency rank of the first word in the cognate pair
and the falseness of the deceptive cognate. Since
frequency and polysemy are correlated, we need
to control for polysemy in order to observe the
marginal effect of frequency on semantic diver-
gence. To this effect, we compute partial correla-
tions, using polysemy as a covariate variable. Sim-
ilarly, when computing correlations for polysemy,
we set frequency as a covariate.

The results showing the correlations for each
language pair are reported in Table 4. The values



165

ES PT IT FR EN
ES - 56.2 47.3 26.5 12.1
PT 20.2 - 34.5 28.8 4.2
IT 18.6 15.0 - 6.2 2.1
FR 14.2 26.0 16.4 - -5.4
EN -9.1 -11.2 -16.5 -14.0 -

Table 5: Correlations of polysemy with falseness.

are considerable for most language pairs, suggest-
ing that the frequency of the word does play a role
in the way its meaning shifts.

We also further try to understand the type of re-
lationship between frequency and falseness. Fol-
lowing the results of Hamilton et al. (2016) show-
ing that frequency relates to semantic shift accord-
ing to a power law, we verify this in our setup by
plotting the log of the frequency against the false-
ness degree, and then the log of polysemy against
the falseness degree, confirming a similar type of
relationship in our case, as shown for Spanish-
Portuguese in Figure 2.

It is interesting to compare our results with
those of Hamilton et al. (2016), where the authors
observe an inverse correlation between frequency
and meaning shift: the more frequent words tend
to change their meaning more slowly. Our exper-
iments show the opposite effect: even though the
correlation values are negative, here we use fre-
quency ranks rather than raw counts, so a negative
correlation indicates a positive relation: more fre-
quent words have diverged more in meaning. This
may be related to the fact that we measure fre-
quency a posteriori: the cognates we compared
had already diverged in meaning before we mea-
sured their frequency, which may lead to a differ-
ent effect than the one observed by Hamilton et al.
(2016).

3.2 Word Polysemy and Semantic Divergence

For polysemy, we make use of WordNet, a seman-
tic network organized in synsets which represent
concepts - where each word is part of as many
synsets as concepts it designates. In this way, the
polysemy of a word can be defined as the number
of synsets that it is part of in WordNet.

We perform similar experiments for polysemy,
correlating the degree of polysemy of the first
word in a cognate pair to the falseness of the pair.
The results, shown in Table 5, are noteworthy for
most language pairs here as well, though less pro-
nounced than for frequency. Figure 2 shows the
relationship between log-polysemy and falseness,

Figure 2: Falseness correlation with log-frequency and
log-polysemy for Spanish-Portuguese.

which displays a clear linear trend. More than
that, it is interesting to see that the correlations are
higher for languages which are known to be more
closely related: the strongest effects are observed
for Spanish and Portuguese, which are the clos-
est, geographically, of all Romance languages and
may have evolved together for parts of their his-
tory. English, as the only non-Romance language,
also stands out for showing the weakest effects
of polysemy on falseness for most language pairs,
and for some even shows an inversed effect of neg-
ative correlation with falseness with Romance lan-
guages.

For Romance languages, polysemy proves to
be positively correlated with falseness, confirm-
ing the results on monolingual experiments in pre-
vious studies: more polysemantic words seem to
suffer more semantic shift – or rather, in our case,
words which have undergone more semantic shift
tend to be more polysemantic.

4 Conclusions

We have proposed in this paper a new perspective
for studying semantic change: comparing mean-
ing of cognate words across languages.

We have shown how frequency and polysemy
relate to semantic shifts of cognates across lan-
guages, demonstrating that both the frequency and
polysemy of cognates positively correlate with
their cross-lingual semantic shift, taking the first
steps towards formulating statistical laws of cross-
lingual semantic change. In the future, includ-
ing the proto-word in the analysis where available
(in this case, the Latin etymon) may give further
insight into how cognates change their meaning.
Additionally, it would be interesting to further ex-
plain these correlations, as well as study other hy-
pothesized laws of semantic change in a multilin-
gual setting.



166

References
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin,

and Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Enriching Word Vec-
tors with Subword Information. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.04606.

Lyle Campbell. 1998. Historical Linguistics. An Intro-
duction. MIT Press.

Santiago Castro, Jairo Bonanata, and Aiala Rosá. 2018.
A high coverage method for automatic false friends
detection for spanish and portuguese. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Workshop on NLP for Similar
Languages, Varieties and Dialects (VarDial 2018),
pages 29–36.

Yanqing Chen and Steven Skiena. 2016. False-friend
detection and entity matching via unsupervised
transliteration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.06722.

Alina Maria Ciobanu and Liviu P. Dinu. 2014. Build-
ing a Dataset of Multilingual Cognates for the Ro-
manian Lexicon. In Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC 2014, pages 1038–1043.

Alexis Conneau, Guillaume Lample, Marc’Aurelio
Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer, and Hervé Jégou. 2017.
Word translation without parallel data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.04087.

Pedro J Chamizo Dominguez and Brigitte Nerlich.
2002. False friends: their origin and semantics in
some selected languages. Journal of pragmatics,
34(12):1833–1849.

Haim Dubossarsky, Yulia Tsvetkov, Chris Dyer, and
Eitan Grossman. 2015. A bottom up approach to
category mapping and meaning change. In Net-
WordS, pages 66–70.

Haim Dubossarsky, Daphna Weinshall, and Eitan
Grossman. 2017. Outta control: Laws of semantic
change and inherent biases in word representation
models. In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 1136–1145.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statis-
tical Laws of Semantic Change. In Proceedings of
the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL 2016, pages 1489–1501.

Diana Inkpen, Oana Frunza, and Grzegorz Kondrak.
2005. Automatic identification of cognates and false
friends in french and english. In Proceedings of the
International Conference Recent Advances in Natu-
ral Language Processing, volume 9, pages 251–257.

Andrey Kutuzov, Lilja Øvrelid, Terrence Szymanski,
and Erik Velldal. 2018. Diachronic word embed-
dings and semantic shifts: a survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.03537.

Svetlin Nakov, Preslav Nakov, and Elena Paskaleva.
2009. Unsupervised extraction of false friends from
parallel bi-texts using the web as a corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference RANLP-
2009, pages 292–298.

Adam St Arnaud, David Beck, and Grzegorz Kondrak.
2017. Identifying cognate sets across dictionaries of
related languages. In Proceedings of the 2017 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2519–2528.

Nina Tahmasebi, Lars Borin, and Adam Jatowt.
2018. Survey of computational approaches to
diachronic conceptual change. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.06278.

Lianet Sepúlveda Torres and Sandra Maria Aluı́sio.
2011. Using machine learning methods to avoid
the pitfall of cognates and false friends in spanish-
portuguese word pairs. In Proceedings of the 8th
Brazilian Symposium in Information and Human
Language Technology.

Ana Sabina Uban, Alina Ciobanu, and Liviu Dinu.
2019. A computational approach to measuring the
semantic divergence of cognates. In Proceedings of
the 19th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing. To be
published.

Yang Xu and Charles Kemp. 2015. A computational
evaluation of two laws of semantic change. In
CogSci.


