



















































From Insanely Jealous to Insanely Delicious: Computational Models for the Semantic Bleaching of English Intensifiers


Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Computational Approaches to Historical Language Change, pages 1–13
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1

From insanely jealous to insanely delicious: Computational models for the
semantic bleaching of English intensifiers

Yiwei Luo1 Dan Jurafsky1,2 Beth Levin1
1Stanford Linguistics 2Stanford Computer Science
{yiweil, jurafsky, bclevin}@stanford.edu

Abstract

We introduce novel computational models for
modeling semantic bleaching, a widespread
category of change in which words become
more abstract or lose elements of meaning,
like the development of arrive from its earlier
meaning ‘become at shore.’ We validate our
methods on a widespread case of bleaching in
English: de-adjectival adverbs that originate
as manner adverbs (as in awfully behaved)
and later become intensifying adverbs (as in
awfully nice). Our methods formally quantify
three reflexes of bleaching: decreasing similar-
ity to the source meaning (e.g., awful), increas-
ing similarity to a fully bleached prototype
(e.g., very), and increasing productivity (e.g.,
the breadth of adjectives that an adverb modi-
fies). We also test a new causal model and find
evidence that bleaching is initially triggered in
contexts such as conspicuously evident and in-
sanely jealous, where an adverb premodifies a
semantically similar adjective. These contexts
provide a form of “bridging context” (Evans
and Wilkins, 2000) that allow a manner adverb
to be reinterpreted as an intensifying adverb
similar to very.

1 Introduction

Developments in computational semantics and
availability of large diachronic corpora have re-
newed interest in studying historical semantic
change. Recent work has moved away from doc-
umenting and qualitatively categorizing types of
changes (Bréal, 1964; Stern, 1931) to focus on
detecting semantic shifts (Gulordava and Baroni,
2011; Rosenfeld and Erk, 2018; Frermann and
Lapata, 2016; Mitra et al., 2014; Kulkarni et al.,
2015), distinguishing gradual linguistic drifts from
cultural ones (Hamilton et al., 2016a) and as-
sessing laws of change (Hamilton et al., 2016b;
Dubossarsky et al., 2017; Xu and Kemp, 2015;
Ramiro et al., 2018; Luo and Xu, 2018).

Building off prior work, we propose the first
computational study of semantic bleaching, one
of the most widespread changes in word mean-
ing. Work in historical linguistics characterizes
bleaching as an abstraction or loss of some initial
elements of meaning, such as in the example ar-
rive, which has broadened from ‘become at shore’,
or amazing, which has undergone a change from
‘stupefying’ to ‘great’. However, we know very
little about how this change happens as a quantifi-
able and continuous process. For example, can we
measure to what extent a bleached word continues
to bear its root meaning? How much of the mean-
ing of “awefulness” does awfully have, and to what
extent does awfully now mean very? Finally, the
fundamental question of what drives bleaching re-
mains open.

Answering these questions requires a way to
model the nuances of semantic bleaching sepa-
rately from general semantic shifts. Thus, our
work asks the following:

Q1: Can we build computational models of the
bleaching process that match known semantic re-
flexes of bleaching?

To answer this question, we develop methods
for quantifying three known reflexes of bleaching
from the theoretical literature on semantic change:
loss of original lexical meaning, gain of bleached
target meaning, and increasing productivity. We
focus on the case of English de-adjectival adverbs
(awfully nice, insanely delicious), which origi-
nally have a manner meaning derived from the se-
mantics of their root adjective and later bleach into
intensifying adverbs (or intensifiers) (Tab. 1). We
choose this case of bleaching as it represents an
open class of semantically diverse adverbs that ex-
perience exceptionally rapid change and speaker
innovation (Bolinger, 1972; Peters, 1994).1.

1Though he focuses on synchronic properties of degree
words, Bolinger (1972, 18) observes: “[Intensifiers] afford



2

Original usage Bleached usage
awfully behaved awfully nice

wildly flailing wildly easy
insanely muttering insanely delicious
abundantly endow abundantly at ease

singing terribly terribly sorry
aggressively demanded aggressively sunny

Table 1. Examples of the bleaching phenomenon: de-
adjectival adverbs in their original, manner usage and
in their bleached, intensifier usage.

Next, we apply our methodology for model-
ing bleaching to answer open questions concern-
ing how bleaching happens over time:

Q2: Can bleaching be explained in terms of re-
analysis, by which certain contextual factors lead
to one interpretation being favored over another?

Q3: If bleaching is a form of reanalysis, what
are the contexts that trigger this re-interpretation?

We use the same semantically diverse set
of bleaching de-adjectival adverbs to formulate
and test hypotheses pertaining to these questions
(Study 2, Sec. 4), building on previous diachronic
work on intensifiers that have focused on a single
word (Lorenz (2002), Macaulay (2006), Beltrama
and Bochnak (2015), Tagliamonte (2008)). In par-
ticular, we hypothesize that a high semantic simi-
larity between an adverb and the adjectives that it
initially modifies is a crucial contextual factor that
triggers the reanalysis of manner adverbs into in-
tensifiers. This criterion (exemplified by colloca-
tions such as conspicuously evident, terribly grue-
some) is what allows a manner adverb to be inter-
preted as an intensifier in the first place.

2 Methods for modeling bleaching

We translate three known reflexes of seman-
tic bleaching from the literature—loss of lexi-
cal meaning; gain of intensifier meaning; in-
creased productivity—into relationships between
word embeddings and n-gram parse context. For
our n-gram data, we use the English fiction por-
tion of the Google Books English n-grams cor-
pus (Lin et al., 2012) and for the historical word
embeddings, we use the HistWords dataset trained
on the same portion of the n-gram dataset (Hamil-
ton et al., 2016b). The full corpus spans the years

a picture of fevered invention and competition it would be
hard to come by elsewhere [...] They are the chief means
of emphasis for speakers for whom all means of emphasis
quickly become stale and need to be replaced.”

1800 to 1999 but we restrict our temporal range to
1850 to 1999, inclusive, due to data sparsity. We
test two different sets of HistWords embeddings:
Word2Vec (W2V) representations and SVD rep-
resentations. All data are aggregated to the granu-
larity of decades, yielding 15 decades total.

2.1 Similarity of adverbs to very (SIMVERY)
As a manner adverb bleaches into an intensify-
ing adverb, we expect the meaning of the ad-
verb to grow more similar to the meaning of
very, the prototypical example of a completely
bleached intensifier (Peters, 1994). We measure
this similarity via the cosine similarity between
the HistWords embedding for an adverb and the
embedding for very, both retrieved for a given
decade. The bleached status of very is empiri-
cally verified in the embedding space: the self-
similarity between consecutive decades is compa-
rable to words expected to change extremely little
over time, such as determiners, numerals, and pro-
nouns (the, two, three, four, them, they, us, etc.)
(Pagel et al., 2007).

2.2 Similarity of adverb to original lexical
meaning (SIMLEX)

As a manner adverb like awfully bleaches into an
intensifier, its meaning diverges from its root ad-
jective’s lexical meaning of “awfulness.” We for-
malize this intuition of a bleaching adverb’s di-
vergence from its lexical meaning as the average
cosine similarity of an adverb to a set of lemmas
(L) related to its lexical meaning (eq. 1). We con-
structed these lemma sets by retrieving WordNet
(Miller, 1998) synonyms for the root adjective and
supplementing these with additional synonyms ac-
cording to the Oxford English Dictionary (OED)
(Simpson et al.) (Tab. 2).

Adverb Lexical source lemmas
disgustingly filthy, filth, repulsive,

aversion
beautifully elegance, elegant, style,

gorgeous, beauteous
wildly savage, rage, fierce,

barbarian, uncivilized
remarkably impact, stun, awe, wonder,

amazement, terror

Table 2. Examples of adverbs and lemmas related to
the lexical source meaning for computing SimLex.



3

SIMLEX(adv) =
1

|L|
∑
lk∈L

simt(adv, lk), (1)

where L is a lemma set of lexical meanings and
simt(adv, lk) is the cosine similarity at time t be-
tween an adverb and a lemma lk in L.2

2.3 Productivity of adverb (BREADTH)
As an adverb bleaches, we expect to see greater
productivity, i.e., an increase in the variety of the
adjectives that it modifies. For example, we expect
to see terribly modifying a greater range of senti-
ment adjectives over time. We suggest two dis-
tinct ways to quantify this semantic breadth. The
first is type diversity (TYPEDIV)—the number of
types modified—which is shown in Bybee (1995)
to be important in determining productivity. The
second is BREADTH, which we measure as nega-
tive cosine similarity of the adjectives, to capture
how semantically similar the set of modified ad-
jectives is. The more similar the adjectives mod-
ified by an adverb are to each other, the less se-
mantically broad they are. This more general ap-
proach is useful since an adverb might modify a
larger number of distinct adjectives while becom-
ing more restricted in the meanings of adjectives
that it modifies.

We extract all adjectives modified by an adverb
for a given decade from the Google Syntactic n-
grams corpus (Goldberg and Orwant, 2013). To
calculate a single value for similarity among many
adjectives, we subset the top 50 adjectives ranked
by log odds, then take the grand average of all the
pairwise similarities between each distinct adjec-
tive type (eq. 2). We also weight each pairwise
similarity by each adjective’s odds of being modi-
fied. The BREADTH B of an intensifier I at time t
can be expressed as:

B(I, t) = −
∑

ai∈AI,t

∑
aj∈AI,t

i 6=j

sim(ai, aj)o(ai)o(aj)

(2)
where AI,t is the set of all adjectives modified by
an intensifier I at time t, sim(·, ·) is the cosine
similarity between two words, and o(·) is the odds
of an adjective being modified by an adverb.

2To increase the robustness of this metric, we restricted
lemmas in L to those whose embeddings remained relatively
stable over time by verifying that their self-similarities over
successive decades did not differ significantly from a highly
stable word set composed of determiners, numerals, and pro-
nouns (t = 8.2e-01, p = 0.85).

3 Study 1: Do our methods capture
bleaching?

We hypothesize that our methods can be used
to distinguish adverbs undergoing bleaching into
intensifying adverbs from non-bleaching control
adverbs. In particular, we expect to see signifi-
cant correlations among the set of intensifiers be-
tween each metric and time in the following di-
rections (Tab. 3) after fitting linear regressions on
{yt, t}2000t=1850, where yt represents a bleaching met-
ric evaluated at decade t.:

metric sign of slope over time
SIMVERY +
SIMLEX −

BREADTH +

Table 3. Predicted correlations between each bleaching
metric over time (as the dependent variable) and time
(as the independent variable) for bleaching adverbs.

To test these predictions, we introduce a set
of bleaching intensifiers and a frequency-matched
control set of non-bleaching adverbs. We ex-
pect to see significantly increasing similarity to
very (SIMVERY), decreasing similarity to origi-
nal meaning (SIMLEX), and increasing productiv-
ity (BREADTH) over time for intensifiers, and we
expect that the slopes over time of these metrics
are significantly greater for intensifiers than for the
control adverbs.

3.1 Datasets
For both the intensifier and control sets, we re-
strict to de-adjectival adverbs (also known as ly
type adverbs).3 We sample these de-adjectival ad-
verbs from lexical classes of adjective roots identi-
fied by Bolinger (1972) and supplement these with
synonyms from WordNet (Miller, 1998). The re-
sult is a set of 250 intensifiers, shown partially in
Table 4. (See Appendix A for the full set.)

Our control set consists of 178 frequency-
matched adverbs sampled from the British Na-
tional Corpus (BNC) (shown partially in Tab. 5,
see Appendix B for the full set).4 We obtained

3We also discard adverbs for specific years due to OOV-
ness at random from either the W2V or SVD embeddings.

4Examples of usage taken from the British National Cor-
pus (BNC) were obtained under the terms of the BNC End
User Licence. Copyright in the individual texts cited resides
with the original intellectual property right holders. For infor-
mation and licensing conditions relating to the BNC, please
see the web site at http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/.



4

Root adjective type Examples
magnitude enormously, vastly, immensely, greatly, abundantly, massively

strength overpoweringly, strongly, vigorously, exuberantly
singularity distinctly, unusually, abnormally, mysteriously
evaluation marvellously, brutally, dramatically, luxuriously, terribly, monstrously

irremediability desperately, abominably, pathetically, disastrously
purity and veracity undoubtedly, thoroughly, absolutely, fully, sincerely

Table 4. Examples of intensifiers, categorized by root adjective type according to Bolinger (1972).

average (relative) frequency estimates from the
Google Books corpus over the period 1850-1990
and we selected the control adverbs from semantic
categories such as time adverbs (firstly, formerly,
finally, temporarily, eventually) and speed adverbs
(rapidly, quickly, slowly, promptly), avoiding se-
mantic categories of intensifiers that have been
identified in the literature (Bolinger, 1972; Morzy-
cki, 2008; Nouwen, 2011; Paradis, 1997).

abruptly accordingly frankly
ironically locally loudly
nationally newly officially
privately quietly simultaneously
happily neatly originally

Table 5. Examples of control adverbs.

3.2 Comparison of BREADTH to TYPEDIV
To determine whether or not BREADTH is inde-
pendent from TYPEDIV (the number of adjective
types modified by an adverb), we compute Spear-
man correlation coefficients between the metrics
for individual adverbs as well as a single correla-
tion between BREADTH and TYPEDIV averaged
across all adverbs. We find that there are no sig-
nificant correlations between average TYPEDIV
and average BREADTH, nor do we find signifi-
cant correlations between the two metrics within
individual adverbs, indicating that our weighted
BREADTH measure captures differences in pro-
ductivity independent from the number of types
that an adverb modifies. In fact, 200 of the 250
intensifiers in our dataset show a decrease in the
number of types they modify within the last 5
decades of our data, but an increase in BREADTH.

3.3 Study 1 Results
We computed the 4 metrics (SIMVERY, SIMLEX,
BREADTH, and TYPEDIV) on the intensifier and
control adverbs described in Section 3.1 over the

14 decades from 1850 to 1990. As a reminder,
SIMVERY measures an adverb’s average semantic
similarity to very and SIMLEX measures an ad-
verb’s average semantic similarity to its root ad-
jective meaning (e.g., completely to {full, entire,
whole, ...}). Both BREADTH and TYPEDIV mea-
sure the collocational freedom of an adverb, with
the latter taking into account only the type di-
versity of adjectives that the adverb modifies and
the former also incorporating the semantic simi-
larity of those modified adjectives to each other.
We then fit linear regressions with each bleach-
ing metric as the dependent variable and time
as the independent variable.5 We take the natu-
ral log of BREADTH so that values are linear af-
ter weighting by adjective frequencies. We also
compute each bleaching metric separately with
Word2Vec (W2V) and SVD embeddings, expect-
ing the strength and direction of the correlations to
be unaffected by the choice of embedding.

The 10 most and least bleached intensifiers by
each metric using W2V embeddings for 1990 are
shown in Tab. 7; examples showing increasing
BREADTH over the period 1850-1990 are shown
in Tab. 6. A visual of increasing BREADTH is
shown in Fig. 1.

The results of our regressions somewhat sup-
port our predicted temporal correlations (Fig. 2).
As a caveat, we note that the increasing size of
the syntactic n-grams corpus over time likely bi-
ases BREADTH, since a larger corpus has more
contexts for each word, thus potentially inflating
the strength of the correlation with time. While
weighting BREADTH by each adjective’s likeli-
hood of being modified may mitigate this bias to
an extent (since each likelihood is expected to de-
crease as corpus size increases), we recognize that
future work should seek more robust forms of nor-

5We performed all regressions using ordinary least
squares models in the StatsModels Python module (Seabold
and Perktold, 2010).



5

1850 1990
terribly deficient, deformed, diseased, beaten, relieved, smitten, small, important, valid,

broken, fatal, unorthodox, guilty... goodlooking, generous, tired, pregnant...
abundantly fat, large, flowing, fertile, available, fraught, intelligible,

rejoicing, grateful... loud, eager, familiar...
enormously rich, large, high, long, great, popular, successful, important, complex,

fat, wealthy, thick... influential, difficult, helpful...

Table 6. Three bleaching adverbs and examples of adjectives they modify in the Google Books corpus at 1850 vs.
1990, showing an increase in productivity of the bleaching adverb.

most bleached least bleached
SIMVERY extremely, terribly, truly, awfully, amply, vigorously, richly, heavily,

definitely, remarkably, absolutely, violently, mysteriously, profusely,
precisely, honestly, seriously severely, furiously, miraculously

SIMLEX entirely, decidedly, heavily, pleasantly, abundantly, enthusiastically,
supremely, particularly, sorely, intensely, delightfully, definitely,

literally, deeply, especially, sharply furiously, curiously, evidently, profusely
BREADTH wholly, completely, particularly, grievously, gorgeously, stupendously, surpass-

deeply, evidently, distinctly, abso- ingly, outrageously, miraculously, deliciously,
lutely, extremely, perfectly, clearly extravagantly, profusely, ludicrously

Table 7. The 10 most and least bleached intensifiers in 1990 according to each metric computed using W2V
embeddings. Intensifiers in bold are most or least bleached according to more than one metric. Intensifiers in
italics are categorized as most bleached by one metric but least bleached by another.

Figure 1. t-SNE visualization of adjectives modified
by insanely in 1850 (plotted as circles; italicized) vs.
in 1990 (plotted as x’s), with convex hulls of each
decade’s adjectives shown in hatched purple and solid
green, respectively, showing that the category of adjec-
tives that are modified by insanely has expanded over
140 years.

malization.
The signs of the slopes match our predictions

for all metrics and across embedding types for the
intensifier set. Moreover, the strength of the cor-
relation is significant for SIMVERY (p<1e-01) as
well as for BREADTH (p<1e-4) when computed
using both W2V and SVD embeddings. For SIM-
LEX, the strength of this correlation is also signif-

icant (p<1e-05), but only when computed using
W2V embeddings.

For the control set, we find that there are no sig-
nificant correlations for SIMLEX computed using
either embedding type (p>0.50), which matches
our predictions. Nor do we find significant corre-
lations for SIMVERY when computed using SVD
embeddings. However, we do find a significant
positive slope (p<1e-06) for SIMVERY+W2V, in-
dicating that the control adverbs in our dataset
are also becoming more similar to very over
time. Nevertheless, the slope over time is still sig-
nificantly greater for intensifiers than control ad-
verbs (t = 3.1, p<1e-02).

Finally, the correlation for BREADTH is signifi-
cant for both intensifiers and control when com-
puted using W2V embeddings as well as using
SVD embeddings (p<1e-63, p<1e-05), suggest-
ing that our current metric for change in produc-
tivity might be heavily dependent on corpus size.
While we did not find any correlations between
BREADTH and TYPEDIV, we find that the lat-
ter measure of productivity also shows significant
trends of increase for both intensifiers and con-
trol (again, likely due to increasing corpus size).
However, we find that the size of the slope for



6

TYPEDIV is significantly greater for intensifiers
than control (t = 4.28, p<1e-04), indicating that
this metric can identify a bleaching adverb given a
control set of non-bleaching adverbs.

3.4 Discussion
We find that the combinations SIMVERY+SVD
and SIMLEX+W2V successfully distinguish be-
tween bleaching and non-bleaching adverbs,
yielding significant slopes over time for the for-
mer and no significant slopes for the latter. Sur-
prisingly, SIMVERY+W2V shows a significant in-
crease over time for both intensifiers and control,
despite the fact that the principal meaning differ-
ence between the two sets is the new meaning of
intensification that only the bleaching adverbs ac-
quire. However, we note that this metric is still
useful for identifying bleaching adverbs when a
control set of non-bleaching adverbs is defined,
since the size of the slope is significantly larger for
the former. We find that BREADTH does not work
in distinguishing bleaching from non-bleaching
adverbs, most likely due to its dependence on
corpus size, though possibly also because it cap-
tures changes that are not due strictly to bleach-
ing (such as metaphorical extension, though we do
not investigate this suspicion here). However, we
find that TYPEDIV (just as SIMVERY+W2V) does
work in the setting of a control set being available,
as the size of the slope is significantly greater for
intensifiers compared to control adverbs.

It is also possible that SIMLEX may show some
bias toward adverbs that are less morphologically
transparent with respect to their root—for exam-
ple, we see that sorely, especially, and decidedly
are among the 10 most bleached intensifiers iden-
tified by SIMLEX in Tab. 7. We hope to explore
refinements to SIMVERY6 and our two productiv-
ity measures (BREADTH and TYPEDIV) in future
work that may better distinguish between bleach-
ing and non-bleaching adverbs even without a con-
trol set readily available.

4 Study 2: Testing a causal theory

Ultimately, we are interested in modeling bleach-
ing in order to test hypotheses concerning how a
change like awfully behaved to awfully nice took

6We perform the same analyses with a modified version of
SIMVERY that measures the average cosine similarity of an
adverb to {very, really} but find that the results are slightly
poorer in distinguishing bleaching from non-bleaching.

place. In particular, we hypothesize a reanalysis-
driven account of this change:

H1: When an adverb begins to modify adjec-
tives that are semantically similar to itself, the ad-
verb begins to be re-interpreted as an intensifier.

We now turn to the logic behind our hypothesis
and the predictions made by our theory.

4.1 A theory of reanalysis-driven bleaching
For our causal theory, we adopt the framework
of reanalysis as in work by Bybee et al. (1994),
Hopper and Traugott (2003), and Evans and
Wilkins (2000). In these works, interpretations
that initially arise out of pragmatic enrichment
become conventionalized over time due to regu-
larly occurring contexts that provide support for
the enriched interpretation. Following Evans and
Wilkins (2000), we refer to these supporting con-
texts as “bridging contexts.”

In the case of the reanalysis of a manner ad-
verb into an intensifier, we hypothesize that the
bridging context crucially involves the premodifi-
cation of an adjective, A, that denotes a semanti-
cally similar property. To develop an intuition for
how this criterion can give rise to the contextual
ambiguity very A, we refer to examples (1-3) be-
low from The Corpus of Historical American En-
glish (COHA) (Davies, 2010-). In (1-3)(b), the
adverb and modified adjective denote independent
properties: abnormalness is independent from be-
ing developed, awfulness is independent from be-
ing behaved, etc. However, in (1-3)(a), both ad-
verb and adjective are associated with a shared se-
mantic property such that the adverb reiterates the
modified adjective in a way that is analogous to
intensification.
(1) a. There is an abnormally

disproportionate lack of demand.
b. The most abnormally developed

organs [...]

(2) a. [...] but it has left these rooms
awfully dirty.

b. [...] most awfully behaved girl she
had ever met.

(3) a. The scenery on the river was
beautifully picturesque [...]

b. The country is beautifully broken,
highly fertile, and cultivated like
a garden.

Our theory hypothesizes that only for the (a) con-
texts involving an adverb and adjective pair both



7

Figure 2. Raw extents of bleaching over time and lines of best fit from OLS linear regressions, showing par-
tial confirmation of predicted trends. Intensifiers show significantly greater increases in W2V similarity to very
(SIMVERY) over time compared to control adverbs (a), intensifiers show increasing SVD similarity to very over
time while control adverbs show no trend (b). Intensifiers show decreasing W2V similarity to their original lexical
meanings (SIMLEX) over time whereas control adverbs show no trend (c). Neither intensifiers nor control show a
significant trend with SIMLEX using SVD embeddings (d). Intensifiers and control adverbs both show increasing
productivity over time measured as BREADTH (e-f) and as raw type diversity, but intensifiers show significantly
greater increases over time compared to control for TYPEDIV (g). Error bars on raw values show 95% bootstrap
confidence intervals.



8

related to a single property p does their combi-
nation yield a synergy such that language users
can infer the meaning ‘very p.’ As these bridg-
ing contexts increase in number, there is eventu-
ally enough evidence for users to infer the adver-
bial meaning ‘very’ even in the absence of the ini-
tial bridging context. In this way, the adverb be-
comes increasingly free to modify new adjectives
without injecting its literal meaning as in (1-3b),
effectively becoming bleached. Thus, the predic-
tion we will test in order to evaluate our theory is
as follows:

• P1. Rate of bleaching (for an adverb, over
a given decade) is positively correlated with
the similarity between an adverb and the ad-
jectives modified by the adverb (henceforth
SIMADJMOD).

4.2 Setup
We calculate rates of bleaching by taking the first
derivative of extent of bleaching with respect to
time, according to eq. 3:

d

dt
(B(K, t)) =

∆B

∆t
=

B(K, t + 10)−B(K, t)
10

(3)
where B(K, t) is rate of bleaching for an adverb
K at time t according to one of the three bleaching
metrics (SIMVERY, SIMLEX, BREADTH), giving
us three different time series for rates of bleaching
per adverb.

Since we are interested in examining how rate
of bleaching over a given decade correlates with
SIMADJMOD, the semantic relatedness between
an adverb and the adjectives it modifies, we com-
pute this variable (for a given adverb and decade)
according to eq. 4:

SIMADJMOD(K, t) =

∑
ai∈AK,t

sim(K, ai)o(ai)

|AK,t|
(4)

where AK,t is the set of all adjectives modified by
an adverb K at time t. Essentially, we take the
average cosine similarity between an adverb and
the adjectives it modifies, weighted by the odds of
each adjective being modified (for a given decade).

4.3 Results
We present results using rates of bleaching com-
puted from SVD embeddings (see Appendix C
for results based on W2V embeddings). We find
that our prediction is borne out: across all adverbs

(both intensifiers and control), rate of bleaching
over a given decade D = [t0, t1) is positively
correlated with SIMADJMOD at t0 (the seman-
tic relatedness between an adverb and adjectives
modified at t0), implying that at a given time, ad-
verbs that modify semantically similar adjectives
will bleach faster into intensifiers over the follow-
ing decade. Lines of best fit from ordinary least
squares regressions are shown in Fig. 3.

Moreover, what distinguishes intensifiers from
non-bleaching control adverbs in our data is the
variable SIMADJMOD: averaged across 1850-
1990, SIMADJMOD is higher among the set of in-
tensifiers compared to the set of control adverbs
(Fig. 4). We further performed paired t-tests and
found that SIMADJMOD is significantly higher
for intensifiers than for the control adverbs (t =
7.3e+1, p<1e-20).7

Figure 3. The more semantically similar an adverb is to
the adjectives that it premodifies (the greater SIMAD-
JMOD), the greater its rate of bleaching according to
SIMVERY (a), SIMLEX (b) and BREADTH (c). Rates
are computed using SVD embeddings and data are
for all adverbs (intensifiers and control) at all years.
Shaded areas show 95% confidence intervals.

7We also found the proportion of adjectives modified by
an adverb relative to verbs to be significantly higher among
intensifiers vs. control (t = 4.4, p<1e-04).



9

Figure 4. Intensifiers on average modify semantically
more similar adjectives compared to control adverbs.

5 Discussion

In this work, we show how word embeddings and
n-gram parse context can be used to model the se-
mantic bleaching of manner adverbs into inten-
sifiers. In particular, we empirically show that
the bleaching of adverbs is associated with intu-
itive changes that have not previously been eval-
uated on large scale data: loss of root meaning,
gain of target meaning, and increasing productiv-
ity. While our diachronic metrics may be biased
by increasing corpus size over the years in our
study, we find that the metrics SIMVERY, SIM-
LEX, and TYPEDIV still show significantly larger
increases for the intensifiers compared to the con-
trol set. Thus, even though increasing corpus size
presumably affects both wordsets equally, we have
evidence to suggest that there are significant addi-
tional increases for intensifiers that may capture
the fact that they are bleaching. We recommend
that future researchers apply these metrics in con-
junction with a control set (matched in frequency)
when using other corpora subject to changes in
size over time so that they may test for these sig-
nificant relative differences between the bleaching
and control words.

We also find that these two classes of adverbs
can be distinguished in the absence of a control set
when modeled using SIMLEX, an adverb’s sim-
ilarity to its root adjectival meaning. This metric
also has the benefit over BREADTH of operational-
izing a fundamental feature of bleaching that is not
shared by other kinds of semantic change (e.g.,
metaphorical extension), as well as being gen-
eralizable (unlike SIMVERY) to cases of bleach-
ing beyond manner adverbs becoming intensifiers.
Thus, we recommend this metric to researchers
interested in modeling bleaching more generally.

We also show the utility of our methodology in
evaluating explanatory hypotheses regarding how
bleaching into intensifiers happens. We found that
there is empirical evidence to support a reanalysis
story: an adverb’s tendency to modify adjectives
that are semantically similar to itself is positively
correlated with its subsequent rate of bleaching.
This pathway of change is intuitive, as it is collo-
cations such as awfully disgusting and clearly ob-
vious that invite the re-interpretation of an adverb
as a marker of emphasis, similar in function to an
intensifier.

In future work, we are interested in refining
BREADTH by normalizing for increasing corpus
size as well as trying different weightings to cap-
ture the landscape of adjectives that an adverb
modifies. It also remains an open question how
generalizable our findings concerning bleaching
of manner adverbs into intensifiers are. It would
be interesting to see if other examples of adverb
bleaching, such as the development of “modera-
tors” (slightly, hardly, etc.) can be modeled as re-
analysis. Another under-explored example of ad-
verb bleaching concerns the development of maxi-
mizing adverbs into reinforcing adverbs. Beltrama
and Staum Casasanto (2017) study the change un-
dergone by totally, but the larger tendency remains
unexplored.

Furthermore, among English adverbs, there are
many other semantic factors that have potential ef-
fects on bleaching. For example, Sweetser (1989)
suggests that words which explicitly highlight se-
mantic facets of the source domain that cannot be
mapped onto the target domain are unlikely candi-
dates for grammaticalization as they require “ac-
tive suppression” of the foregrounded meanings.8

It would be interesting to study the bleaching of
intensifiers with this question in mind—for exam-
ple, the adverb vanishingly occurs in contexts like
vanishingly small and vanishingly rare which are
well-suited for reanalysis, but for vanishingly to
be understood as a generic intensifier would also
require suppression of its meaning of smallness.

Acknowledgments

We thank Daniel Lassiter, Vivek Kulkarni, and
anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback.

8For example, the verb lumber is an unlikely candidate
for undergoing the change from motion verb to tense marker
because it explicitly encodes rate and manner of motion, com-
pared to a verb like go.



10

References
Andrea Beltrama and M Ryan Bochnak. 2015. Inten-

sification without degrees cross-linguistically. Nat-
ural Language & Linguistic Theory, 33(3):843–879.

Andrea Beltrama and Laura Staum Casasanto. 2017.
Totally tall sounds totally younger: Intensification
at the socio-semantics interface. Journal of Soci-
olinguistics, 21(2):154–182.

Dwight Bolinger. 1972. Degree Words. Paris: Mouton.

Michel Bréal. 1964. Semantics: Studies in the science
of meaning. New York: Dover.

Joan Bybee. 1995. Regular morphology and the
lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes,
10(5):425–455.

Joan L Bybee, Revere Dale Perkins, and William Pagli-
uca. 1994. The evolution of grammar: Tense, aspect,
and modality in the languages of the world, volume
196. The University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Mark Davies. 2010-. The Corpus of Histori-
cal American English (COHA): 400 mil-
lion words, 1810-2009. Available online at
https://corpus.byu.edu/coha/.

Haim Dubossarsky, Daphna Weinshall, and Eitan
Grossman. 2017. Outta control: Laws of semantic
change and inherent biases in word representation
models. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 1136–1145, Copenhagen, Denmark. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Nicholas Evans and David Wilkins. 2000. In the
mind’s ear: The semantic extensions of perception
verbs in Australian languages. Language, 76:546–
592.

Lea Frermann and Mirella Lapata. 2016. A Bayesian
model of diachronic meaning change. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
4:31–45.

Yoav Goldberg and Jon Orwant. 2013. A dataset of
syntactic-ngrams over time from a very large corpus
of English books. In *SEM.

Kristina Gulordava and Marco Baroni. 2011. A distri-
butional similarity approach to the detection of se-
mantic change in the Google books ngram corpus.
In Proceedings of the GEMS 2011 Workshop on GE-
ometrical Models of Natural Language Semantics,
pages 67–71, Edinburgh, UK. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016a. Cultural shift or linguistic drift? comparing
two computational measures of semantic change.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2116–2121, Austin, Texas. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016b. Diachronic word embeddings reveal statisti-
cal laws of semantic change. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1489–1501, Berlin, Germany. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Paul J Hopper and Elizabeth Closs Traugott. 2003.
Grammaticalization. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Vivek Kulkarni, Rami Al-Rfou, Bryan Perozzi, and
Steven Skiena. 2015. Statistically significant de-
tection of linguistic change. In Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on World Wide Web,
pages 625–635. International World Wide Web Con-
ferences Steering Committee.

Yuri Lin, Jean-Baptiste Michel, Erez Aiden Lieberman,
Jon Orwant, Will Brockman, and Slav Petrov. 2012.
Syntactic annotations for the google books ngram
corpus. In Proceedings of the ACL 2012 System
Demonstrations, pages 169–174, Jeju Island, Korea.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Gunter Lorenz. 2002. Really worthwhile or not really
significant? A corpus-based approach to the delex-
icalization and grammaticalization of intensifiers in
Modern English. New reflections on grammatical-
ization, 49:143.

Yiwei Luo and Yang Xu. 2018. Stability in the tempo-
ral dynamics of word meanings. In CogSci.

Ronald Macaulay. 2006. Pure grammaticalization: The
development of a teenage intensifier. Language
Variation and Change, 18(3):267–283.

George Miller. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database. MIT press.

Sunny Mitra, Ritwik Mitra, Martin Riedl, Chris Bie-
mann, Animesh Mukherjee, and Pawan Goyal.
2014. That’s sick dude!: Automatic identification
of word sense change across different timescales. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1020–1029, Baltimore, Mary-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marcin Morzycki. 2008. Adverbial modification of
adjectives: Evaluatives and a little beyond. Event
structures in linguistic form and interpretation,
5:103.

Rick Nouwen. 2011. Degree modifiers and monotonic-
ity. In Vagueness and language use, pages 146–164.
Springer, Palgrave.

Mark Pagel, Quentin D Atkinson, and Andrew Meade.
2007. Frequency of word-use predicts rates of
lexical evolution throughout Indo-European history.
Nature, 449(7163):717.

https://doi.org/10.1080/01690969508407111
https://doi.org/10.1080/01690969508407111
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1118
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1118
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1118
https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00081
https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00081
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W11-2508
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W11-2508
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W11-2508
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D16-1229
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D16-1229
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P16-1141
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P16-1141
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P12-3029
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P12-3029
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/P14-1096
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/P14-1096


11

Carita Paradis. 1997. Degree modifiers of adjectives
in spoken British English, volume 92. Lund: Lund
University Press.

Hans Peters. 1994. Degree adverbs in Early Modern
English, volume 13. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

Christian Ramiro, Mahesh Srinivasan, Barbara C. Malt,
and Yang Xu. 2018. Algorithms in the historical
emergence of word senses. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 115(10):2323–2328.

Alex Rosenfeld and Katrin Erk. 2018. Deep neural
models of semantic shift. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers),
pages 474–484, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold. 2010. Statsmod-
els: Econometric and statistical modeling with
python. In 9th Python in Science Conference.

John Simpson, Edmund SC Weiner, et al. Oxford En-
glish Dictionary online. Accessed October 2018.

Gustaf Stern. 1931. Meaning and change of meaning.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Eve Sweetser. 1989. From etymology to pragmat-
ics: Metaphorical and cultural aspects of semantic
structure, volume 54. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Sali A Tagliamonte. 2008. So different and pretty cool!
Recycling intensifiers in Toronto, Canada. English
Language & Linguistics, 12(2):361–394.

Yang Xu and Charles Kemp. 2015. A computational
evaluation of two laws of semantic change. In
CogSci.

A Full set of 250 intensifiers
abnormally abominably absolutely
abundantly abysmally actually
acutely adamantly aggressively
alarmingly amazingly amply
annoyingly astonishingly astronomically
atrociously awfully basically
beautifully bitterly blatantly
breathtakingly brutally categorically
clearly cloyingly colossally
comically completely considerably
conspicuously copiously crazily
criminally curiously dangerously
decadently decently decidedly
deeply defiantly definitely
delectably deliciously delightfully
depressingly desperately devastatingly
disastrously disconcertingly disgustingly
dismayingly distinctly distressingly
disturbingly dizzyingly doubly
dramatically dreadfully egregiously
embarrassingly empatically endlessly
enormously enthusiastically entirely
epically especially evidently
exceedingly excellently exceptionally
excessively excruciatingly exorbitantly
extensively extraordinarily extravagantly
extremely exuberantly fairly
fiercely firmly fortunately
frightfully frustratingly fully
fundamentally furiously genuinely
gorgeously greatly grievously
grossly handsomely harshly
heavily hellishly hilariously
honestly horribly horrifically
hugely hysterically immensely
immoderately impossibly impressively
improperly inappropriately inconveniently
indecently indescribably inestimably
inexcusably inexplicably infinitely
insanely intensely intimately
intolerably justly laughably
lavishly legitimately liberally
literally ludicrously luxuriously
madly magically magnificently
majorly marginally markedly

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-1044
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-1044


12

marvellously massively mightily
mind-blowingly mindlessly miraculously
miserably monstrously mysteriously
needlessly nicely notably
noticeably notoriously objectively
obnoxiously obscenely offensively
outrageously outstandingly overbearingly
overpoweringly overtly overwhelmingly
painfully particularly passionately
pathetically perfectly phenomenally
pleasantly profusely prominently
purely radically reasonably
recklessly regretfully regrettably
relentlessly reliably remarkably
revoltingly richly savagely
scarily seriously severely
shamelessly sharply shockingly
sickeningly significantly simply
sincerely sinfully solidly
sorely spectacularly splendidly
startlingly strangely strikingly
strongly stunningly stupendously
stupidly substantially superbly
supremely surpassingly surprisingly
terribly terrifically thankfully
thoroughly threateningly totally
tragically tremendously truly
unapologetically unbearably uncomfortably
uncommonly uncontrollably undeniably
undoubtedly unequivocally unexpectedly
unfortunately unjustly unmistakably
unnecessarily unnervingly unpleasantly
unquestionably unreasonably unsettlingly
unspeakably unusually unutterably
utterly vastly veritably
vigorously violently virtually
visibly weirdly wholeheartedly
wholly wickedly wildly
woefully wonderfully worryingly

B Full set of 178 control adverbs
abruptly accordingly accurately
actively adequately allegedly
alternatively angrily annually
apparently appropriately approximately
automatically badly barely
bitterly briefly broadly
carefully comfortably commonly
comparatively consequently consistently
constantly continually continuously
conversely correctly currently
daily deliberately differently
directly duly easily
easily economically effectively
efficiently equally essentially
eventually exactly exclusively
explicitly finally financially
firstly formally formerly
frankly freely frequently
generally gently gradually
happily hastily historically
hopefully ideally immediately
importantly incidentally increasingly
independently indirectly individually
inevitably initially instantly
invariably ironically jointly
kindly lately legally
lightly locally loudly
mainly mentally mostly
namely neatly necessarily
newly normally obviously
occasionally officially openly
originally partially partly
permanently personally physically
politically poorly positively
possibly potentially practically
precisely predominantly presently
presumably previously primarily
principally privately probably
promptly properly publicly
quickly rapidly rarely
readily recently regularly
reportedly repsectively rightly
roughly sadly safely
secondly seemingly separately
sexually shortly silently



13

similarly simultaneously slowly
smoothly socially softly
solely specifically steadily
strictly subsequently successfully
suddenly sufficiently supposedly
swiftly technically temporarily
tightly traditionally typically
ultimately urgently usually
vaguely weakly widely

C Diachronic correlations for W2V
embeddings-based rates of bleaching

Figure 5. The more semantically similar an adverb is
to the adjectives that it premodifies, the greater its rate
of bleaching by all three metrics. Rates are computed
using HistWords W2V embeddings and data are for all
adverbs (intensifiers and control) at all years.


