




















Modeling language constructs with fuzzy sets: some approaches,
examples and interpretations

Pavlo Kapustin
University of Bergen

pavlo.kapustin@uib.no

Michael Kapustin
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
michael.kapustin@gmail.com

Abstract

We present and discuss a couple of approaches, including different types of projections, and
some examples, discussing the use of fuzzy sets for modeling meaning of certain types of language
constructs. We are mostly focusing on words other than adjectives and linguistic hedges as these
categories are the most studied from before. We discuss logical and linguistic interpretations of
membership functions. We argue that using fuzzy sets for modeling meaning of words and other
natural language constructs, along with situations described with natural language is interesting both
from purely linguistic perspective, and also as a meaning representation for problems of computa-
tional linguistics and natural language processing.

1 Introduction

The use of fuzzy sets for representing meaning of some types of natural language constructs was first
proposed and described in earlier works of Lotfi Zadeh (Zadeh, 1971, 1972). Representation based on
fuzzy sets is very expressive as it allows to quantitatively model the nature of the relationship between
different concepts, and represent vagueness and imprecision that are so common to natural language.

Nowadays, fuzzy sets seem to be relatively little known among linguists, and little used in natu-
ral language processing (Carvalho et al., 2012; Novák, 2017). Most of the examples described in the
literature include certain types of adjectives and linguistic hedges.

We would like to contribute to this field by describing a couple of approaches, including different
types of projections, that can be used for modeling meaning of some types of language constructs using
fuzzy sets. We describe and discuss examples that include some adjectives, adverbs and prepositions.
We discuss logical and linguistic interpretations of membership functions (Hersh and Caramazza, 1976),
and argue for importance of distinguishing between them when modeling language constructs with fuzzy
sets.

2 Related work

Here we briefly mention some of the work related to the use of fuzzy sets as a meaning representation.
In his early works, Lotfi Zadeh suggests modeling meaning of certain types of adjectives (e.g.

“small”, “medium”, “large”) as fuzzy sets, and some lingustic hedges (e.g. “very”, “slightly” — as
operators, acting on these fuzzy sets (Zadeh, 1971, 1972). Hersh and Caramazza (1976) introduce logi-
cal and linguistic interpretations of membership functions.

Novák (2017) describes Fuzzy Natural Logic, a mathematical theory that attempts to model seman-
tics of natural language, including Theory of Evaluative Linguistic Expressions (Novák, 2008). Some
ways of modeling meaning of words like nouns and verbs) have also been suggested (Novák, 1992, 2017;
M. Kapustin and P. Kapustin, 2015). Novák et al. (2016) includes an example of evaluative linguistic
expressions that contain perceptions like “near” and “far”.



In M. Kapustin and P. Kapustin (2015) we describe a framework for computational interpreting of
natural language fragments, and suggest modeling meaning of words as operators. P. Kapustin (2015)
describes an application that implements and tests some features of this framework in a simplified setting.

There is some work aiming to make fuzzy sets easier to learn from data. For example, Runkler
(2016) describes an approach for generation of linguistically meaningful membership functions from
word vectors. We describe compatibility intervals, a meaning representation that is closely related to
fuzzy sets (P. Kapustin and M. Kapustin, 2019b).

We discuss how people relate some language constructs to compatibility intervals in an experimental
study (P. Kapustin and M. Kapustin, 2019a).

3 Method

3.1 Projections

In this paper, we describe modeling meaning of language constructs by approximating it with a set of
projections of this construct on different properties (here term “property” is used in a relatively gen-
eral sense).1 Each such projection is defined by a fuzzy set and a corresponding membership function
that describes compatibility of the construct with different values that the respective property may take.
The intuition behind this approach is simple: language constructs contain information about different
properties, and information about each property can be modeled as an independent projection.2

Consider fig. 1. Presented membership functions attempt to quantitatively relate constructs “ex-
pected”, “common”, “possible”, “extraordinary” to surprisingness of a certain result. Of course, meaning
of mentioned words is complex and cannot be fully described in terms of surprisingness, but they do tell
us something about it, among other things. So, these membership functions may be seen as projections
of the meanings of these constructs onto property “surprisingness”.

3.2 Membership function arguments and values

Regarding values of membership function arguments (in this case, values of “surprisingness”), here we
are using a relative scale ranging from zero to one. Choice of scale, including its type (linear, logarithmic,
etc.), and mapping between real values and relative values is a topic of separate research and is beyond
the scope of this paper.

We look at interpreting membership functions values similarly to Zadeh (1975, 1978): values of
membership function can be seen as degrees of compatibility between the value of the function argument
and the construct the membership function is describing. Consider fig. 1: µexpected(1) = µcommon(1) = 0,
because constructs “expected” and “common” are not compatible with high values of surprisingness, and
µextraordinary(1) = 1, because “extraordinary” is highly compatible with high values of suprisingness (µ
is denoting degree of membership).

3.3 Membership functions: different interpretations

Similarly to Hersh and Caramazza (1976), we distinguish between two different interpretations of mem-
bership functions: logical (modeling what is “logically”, or “technically” correct), and linguistic (mod-
eling how the word is used).

Consider fig. 2: “young1” corresponds to logical interpretation, reflecting the fact that infants and
newborns are, indeed, as young as one can be. On the other hand, “young2” corresponds to linguistic
interpretation, reflecting the fact that when people use the word “young”, they usually refer to ages other

1We propose a related but a bit more specific definition of properties in M. Kapustin and P. Kapustin (2015).
2This approach may be seen as a slight generalization of the ideas described in Lotfi Zadeh’s early works (Zadeh, 1971,

1972), where construct meaning is modeled as one fuzzy set (one projection), and as a special case of the approach we suggest
in M. Kapustin and P. Kapustin (2015), where each concept is modeled as an operator.



Figure 1: “Expected”, “common”, “possi-
ble”, “extraordinary” related to “surpris-
ingness”.

Figure 2: Logical (young1) and linguistic
(young2) interpretations.

than newborns and infants. However, for the word “old” its usage does not differ from what is “logically”
correct: we may say “old” about someone who is 80 or 100 years old.

Let’s consider fig. 1 again: µexpected(0) > µcommon(0) > µpossible(0). This corresponds to linguistic
interpretation and models that, even though highly anticipated results are probably both common and
possible, “expected” might be a better word than “common” (and especially than “possible”) to describe
such results (of course, this only takes “surprisingness” into account).

We believe that many, but probably, not all of the differences between logical and linguistic inter-
pretations are related to scalar implicatures and related phenomena, and believe that this needs to be
investigated further.

Differing logical and linguistic interpretations have some interesting implications. Consider fig. 3.
Here we apply negation, implemented as Zadeh’s complementation (Zadeh, 1972), to constructs “young1”,
“young2” and “old”. While such negation seems to work well with the logical interpretation, it gives
somewhat unexpected results with the linguistic interpretation: according to not(µyoung2), it appears that
infants are less “not young” than newborns, which is not correct.

We think that logical and linguistic interpretations complement each other, each of them modeling
different aspects of the meaning of the language constructs, and for some words may need to be mod-
eled as separate membership functions. Examples in this paper follow linguistic interpretation (unless
mentioned otherwise).

3.4 Choice of constructs, projections and membership functions

The choice of constructs, projections and membership functions in this paper is subjective and serves as
an illustration. For the experimental study, please see P. Kapustin and M. Kapustin (2019a).

4 One-dimensional projections

One-dimensional projection is a projection onto one property that allows to model how a language con-
struct relates to this property.

4.1 One-dimensional projections: time references

Here we describe how one-dimensional projections can be used for modeling meaning of words like
“after”, “afterwards”, “later”, “until” and “since”. In these examples we choose to focus on the meaning



Figure 3: Negation of young2 gives some-
what unexpected results.

Figure 4: Time reference given by “after
breakfast” in “you can play after break-
fast”.

Figure 5: Time references given by “af-
terwards” and “later” in “let’s discuss this
afterwards / later”.

Figure 6: Time references given by “un-
til darkness” in “you can play until dark-
ness”.

aspect of the words that has to do with providing a time reference relative to the time of utterance (given
by “now”).

Consider fig. 4. Here we choose to model “after” as suggested by Vocabulary.com (2018a): “happen-
ing at a time subsequent to a reference time”, that’s why the membership function for “after breakfast”
is decreasing relatively rapidly (this would be different if we chose to model “after” as in “the world
has changed after the Second World War”). “Before” may be modeled in a similar way, but we do not
include a figure here for brevity.

Consider fig. 5. Here we choose to model “afterwards” as a function that decreases relatively rapidly
after a certain point, agreeing with dictionaries mentioning that a certain reference time is usually as-
sumed (Vocabulary.com, 2018b; Cambridge.org, 2018a). On the other hand, “later” is modeled as “at
some time in the future” (Vocabulary.com, 2018c; Cambridge.org, 2018b), that’s why the function is
decreasing slower, µlater > µafterwards in more distant future, and µlater(1) > 0. This would be different
if we chose to model “later” as a synonym for “afterwards” (this meaning of “later” is also suggested by
the same dictionaries).

Consider figs. 6 and 7. The fact that the time references given by “darkness” and “summer” are
relatively vague is modeled by slow decrease of µuntilDarkness and slow increase of µsinceSummer.



Figure 7: Time reference given by “since
summer” in “you have had the book since
summer”.

Figure 8: “Mere”, “only”, “just”,
“whole”, “entire” related to perceived
quantity in “only two days”, “whole
room”, “mere one percent”.

4.2 One-dimensional projections: perception of quantities

Consider fig. 8. Here we suggest how one-dimensional projections can be used to model meaning of
words like “only”, “just”, “whole”, “entire”, “mere”. In these examples we choose to focus on what
these words tell us about certain quantity compared to our expectations (e.g. Zeevat, 2009; Berkeley.edu,
2019). We use name “perceived quantity” for the property.

Here we let µwhole(1) = µentire(1) = 1 to model the fact that words “whole” and “entire” may be used
with something perceived as very large (e.g. “entire universe”). On the other hand, we let µmere(0) =
µonly(0) = µjust(0) = 0, because we cannot think of examples when these words are used with zero
quantities (e.g. “a mere zero”, “only nothing” and “just no one” sound strange). Also, here we choose to
model “mere” as a more specific word than “only” and ”just”, as suggested by OxfordDictionaries.com
(2019b): “used to emphasize how small or insignificant someone or something is”. Here we do it by
letting µmere cover less area than µonly, just on fig. 8.

4.3 One-dimensional projections on related properties: repeating events

Consider fig. 9. Here we are attempting to model what the words “seldom”, “occasionally”, “regularly”,
“often” tell us about event frequency (as in “I often play chess”). The words “occasionally” and “regu-
larly” seem to be less specific than the words “seldom” and “often”, and we model this by letting their
membership functions cover larger area under the curve.

Consider fig. 10, where we are attempting to model what the words “seldom”, “occasionally”, “reg-
ularly”, “usually”, “often” tell us about expectedness of an event (as in “I often play chess when we meet
with my friends”)3. We model “regularly” as a more specific word on fig. 10 than on fig. 9, because we
believe that “I regularly play chess when I meet with my friends” means a rather high expectedness of
the game of chess if the meeting happens (but lower than for “usually” or “often”).4 Note that we include
“usually” on fig. 10, but not on fig. 9, because it is possible to say “I usually play chess when I meet with
my friends”, while “I usually play chess” sounds strange.

In this example words “seldom”, “occasionally”, “regularly”, “often” have two independent projec-
tions on related properties: “frequency” and “expectedness”. In general, we think that having multiple
independent projections on related properties is interesting, in particular because it may help the systems

3Here by “expectedness” we mean “the quality or state of being expected” (CollinsDictionary.com, 2019).
4We discuss how people relate these and other constructs to compatibility intervals (P. Kapustin and M. Kapustin, 2019b), a

representation closely related to fuzzy sets, in an experimental study (P. Kapustin and M. Kapustin, 2019a).



Figure 9: “Seldom”, “occasionally”,
“regularly”, “often” related to event fre-
quency.

Figure 10: “Seldom”, “occasionally”,
“regularly”, “usually”, “often” related to
event expectedness.

learn more about the relation between these properties, and needs more research.

5 Membership functions that depend on other functions

5.1 Membership functions that depend on other functions: sufficiency and excess

Consider figs. 11 and 12. Here we are attempting to model what constructs “enough”, “not enough”,
and “too much” tell us about the amount of certain property with respect to how much property is de-
sirable/acceptable, modeled with a separate desarability/acceptability function.5 We believe that for the
construct “not enough” to be meaningful, there should be a place where desirability/acceptability func-
tion is increasing (e.g. “not enough air pollution” usually does not make sense). Likewise, the construct
“too much” (or too expensive, etc.) only makes sense if there is a place where desirability/acceptability
function is decreasing (e.g. “I have too much money” would often require an explanation to answer why
having less money would be more desirable).

Here we follow linguistic interpretation for µenough, modeling the fact that we would normally use
words other than “enough”, when the amount of property is much higher than the amount qualifying as
“enough”, and that is why µenough is gradually decreasing after a certain point. We let µenough(1) > 0 as
“enough” may still be used in such situations (e.g. “he earns enough” may be used about a millionaire
when one prefers to be less specific).

It is interesting to note that figs. 11 and 12 present examples when both membership functions and
the scale of members function arguments depend on another function (in this case, desirability / accept-
ability). We believe that such dependencies need further research for such models to become practically
useful for problems of computational linguistics and natural language processing.

6 Multi-dimensional projections

Sometimes modeling meaning of certain constructs requires membership functions that take several ar-
guments, when it is the relation of the arguments is what defines the concept. Here we are discussing
several examples of this kind.

Consider figs. 13 and 14. Like many other constructs, “already” and “still” have several related
meanings with subtle differences. Here we are focusing on modeling surprise at the fact that something
happens or will happen earlier or later than expected (e.g. Zeevat, 2009, 2013; Cambridge.org, 2019a,

5Similar notion of admissibility is used in Meier (2003).



Figure 11: “Enough” and “not enough”
related to the amount of property in
“enough / not enough for everyone”.

Figure 12: “Too” related to the amount of
property in “I think that owning a car is
too expensive these days”.

Figure 13: “Already” related to perceived
change and perceived elapsed time in “it
is already finished”.

Figure 14: “Still” related to perceived
change and perceived elapsed time in
“they are still working”.

2019d). We represent these constructs by relating properties “perceived change” and “perceived elapsed
time”. “Already” means that perceived elapsed time is relatively low, and perceived change is relatively
high, while “still” means the opposite.

Consider fig. 15. Here we model construct “efficient” by relating properties “progress” and “elapsed
time”: “efficient” means that elapsed time is relatively low, and progress is relatively high.

Consider fig. 16. Many dictionaries define “lately” as “recently” or “not long ago” (OxfordDic-
tionaries.com, 2019a; Cambridge.org, 2019c; Merriam-Webster.com, 2019). However, Cambridge.org
(2019b) explains that “lately” is used for states or repeating events, mostly with present perfect, and is not
used for single events. Here we choose to model “lately” in this meaning, as a word that describes recent
state of things: when the time is close to zero (further in the past), pretty much all states are compatible
with the construct “it rains a lot lately”. In other words, we have no information about the state of things,
and this is modeled by membership degree of “lately” being approximately equal to one, as long as time
is close to zero. When the time is closer to one (recent past), only the states with high average rainfall are
compatible with the construct. It seems that “lately” is sometimes used as a word that contrasts recent
situation with earlier situation, however we believe that this can be very context dependent, and choose
not to model it here: according to fig. 16, we don’t know how things were in the past.



Figure 15: “Efficient” related to progress
and time in “this dryer is very efficient”.

Figure 16: “Lately” related to time and
average rainfall in “it rains a lot lately”.

7 Discussion

Although the choice of membership functions used in the examples is subjective, we hope that they are a
useful illustration to the approaches and ideas described in the paper, as well as to the importance of dis-
tinguishing between logical and linguistic interpretations of membership functions. For the experimental
study, please see P. Kapustin and M. Kapustin (2019a).

One can see applications of such models both in natural language understanding and natural language
generation. When a system meets a language construct, it can understand it in terms of “underlying”
properties, e.g. “often” — in terms of “frequency”, and “already” — in terms of the relation between
“perceived change” and “perceived elapsed time”. Similarly, having information about possible values
of property or properties, a system can attempt to describe the situation with appropriate words, e.g.
information about “progress” and “time” can be described using words like “efficient”.6

We think that wider adoption of fuzzy sets in computational linguistics and natural language pro-
cessing may benefit from the research that will help to make such models easier to learn from data. For
example, Runkler (2016) describes an approach for generation of linguistically meaningful membership
functions from word vectors. We suggest a meaning representation that is closely related to membership
functions, but may be somewhat easier to learn from data (P. Kapustin and M. Kapustin, 2019b).

In many cases, when trying to understand how the membership functions should behave, and even
qualitatively compare membership functions for related words, it was not that easy to find linguistic
evidence in the literature. In some cases we had a feeling that dictionary definitions left some important
parts of the construct meaning unexplained (but it was clear from the examples or explanations found
elsewhere). We noticed these things because of our attempts to model meanings of the constructs in a
more formal way (in this case using membership functions).

We argue that fuzzy sets and membership functions are useful tools that are interesting both from
purely linguistic perspective, and also as a meaning representation for problems of computational lin-
guistics and natural language processing, and hope that more researchers become interested in this area.

Acknowledgements

We thank Vadim Kimmelman and Csaba Veres for helpful discussions and comments. We thank anony-
mous reviewers for helpful feedback.

6We suggest one approach for describing situations in words in M. Kapustin and P. Kapustin (2015).



References

Berkeley.edu (2019). Frame:RankedExpectation. https://framenet2.icsi.berkeley.edu/
fnReports/data/frameIndex.xml?frame=Ranked_expectation.

Cambridge.org (2018a). Afterwards. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/
english/afterwards.

Cambridge.org (2018b). Later. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/engl
ish/later.

Cambridge.org (2019a). Already. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/briti
sh-grammar/already.

Cambridge.org (2019b). Late or lately. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/
british-grammar/late-or-lately.

Cambridge.org (2019c). Lately. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/
english/lately.

Cambridge.org (2019d). Still. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/british-
grammar/still.

Carvalho, J. P., F. Batista, and L. Coheur (2012). A critical survey on the use of fuzzy sets in speech and
natural language processing. In Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), 2012 IEEE International Conference
on, 1–8. IEEE.

CollinsDictionary.com (2019). Expectedness. https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dict
ionary/english/expectedness.

Hersh, H. M., and A. Caramazza (1976). A fuzzy set approach to modifiers and vagueness in natural
language. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 105 (3): 254.

Kapustin, M., and P. Kapustin (2015). Modeling meaning: computational interpreting and understanding
of natural language fragments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.08149.

Kapustin, P. (2015). Computational comprehension of spatial directions expressed in natural language.
Master’s thesis, The University of Bergen.

Kapustin, P., and M. Kapustin (2019a). Language constructs as compatibility intervals: an experimental
study. In preparation.

Kapustin, P., and M. Kapustin (2019b). Modeling meaning of language constructs using compatibility
intervals. In submission.

Meier, C. (2003). The meaning of too, enough, and so... that. Natural Language Semantics 11 (1): 69–
107.

Merriam-Webster.com (2019). Lately. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
lately.

Novák, V. (1992). The alternative mathematical model of linguistic semantics and pragmatics. In The
Alternative Mathematical Model of Linguistic Semantics and Pragmatics, 87–183. Springer.

Novák, V. (2008). A comprehensive theory of trichotomous evaluative linguistic expressions. Fuzzy Sets
and Systems 159 (22): 2939–2969.

Novák, V. (2017). Fuzzy logic in natural language processing. In Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), 2017
IEEE International Conference on, 1–6. IEEE.

Novák, V., I. Perfilieva, A. Dvorák, et al. (2016). Insight into Fuzzy Modeling. John Wiley & Sons.



OxfordDictionaries.com (2019a). Lately. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definit
ion/lately.

OxfordDictionaries.com (2019b). Mere. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definiti
on/mere.

Runkler, T. A. (2016). Generation of linguistic membership functions from word vectors. In Fuzzy Sys-
tems (FUZZ-IEEE), 2016 IEEE International Conference on, 993–999. IEEE.

Vocabulary.com (2018a). After. https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/after.

Vocabulary.com (2018b). Afterwards. https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/after
wards.

Vocabulary.com (2018c). Later. https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/later.

Zadeh, L. A. (1971). Quantitative fuzzy semantics. Information Sciences 3 (2): 159–176.

Zadeh, L. A. (1972). A Fuzzy-Set-Theoretic Interpretation of Linguistic Hedges. Journal of Cybernetics.

Zadeh, L. A. (1975). The concept of a linguistic variable and its application to approximate reasoning—I.
Information sciences 8 (3): 199–249.

Zadeh, L. A. (1978). Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory of possibility. Fuzzy sets and systems 1 (1): 3–28.

Zeevat, H. (2009). “Only” as a mirative particle.

Zeevat, H. (2013). Expressing surprise by particles. In Beyond Expressives: Explorations in Use-Conditional
Meaning, 297–320. Brill.


