




































 

 

Unsupervised Multi–Word Term Recognition in Welsh 
 

Irena Spasić 

School of Computer Science & Informatics 

Cardiff University 

SpasicI@cardiff.ac.uk 

David Owen 

School of Computer Science & Informatics 

Cardiff University 

OwenDW1@cardiff.ac.uk 

 

Dawn Knight 

School of English, Communication & Philosophy 

Cardiff University 

KnightD5@cardiff.ac.uk 

 

Andreas Artemiou 

School of Mathematics 

Cardiff University 

ArtemiouA@cardiff.ac.uk 

 

Abstract 

This paper investigates an adaptation of an 

existing system for multi-word term 

recognition, originally developed for 

English, for Welsh. We overview the 

modifications required with a special focus 

on an important difference between the two 

representatives of two language families, 

Germanic and Celtic, which is concerned 

with the directionality of noun phrases. We 

successfully modelled these differences by 

means of lexico–syntactic patterns, which 

represent parameters of the system and, 

therefore, required no re–implementation of 

the core algorithm. The performance of the 

Welsh version was compared against that of 

the English version. For this purpose, we 

assembled three parallel domain–specific 

corpora. The results were compared in terms 

of precision and recall. Comparable 

performance was achieved across the three 

domains in terms of the two measures (P = 

68.9%, R = 55.7%), but also in the ranking of 

automatically extracted terms measured by 

weighted kappa coefficient ( = 0.7758). 

These early results indicate that our approach 

to term recognition can provide a basis for 

machine translation of multi-word terms. 

1 Introduction 

Terms are noun phrases (Daille, 1996; Kageura, 

1996) that are frequently used in specialised texts to 

refer to concepts specific to a given domain (Arppe, 

1995). In other words, terms are linguistic 

representations of domain-specific concepts (Frantzi, 

1997). As such, terms are key means of 

communicating effectively in a scientific or technical 

discourse (Jacquemin, 2001). To ensure that terms 

conform to specific standards, they often undergo a 

process of standardisation. Such standards are 

commonly based on the following principles. First 

and foremost, a term should be linguistically correct 

and reflect the key characteristics of the concept it 

represents in concise manner. There should only be 

one term per concept and all other variations (e.g. 

acronyms and inflected forms) should be derivatives 

of that term. TermCymru, a terminology used by the 

Welsh Government translators, assigns a status to 

each term depending on the degree to which it has 

been standardised: fully standardised, partially 

standardised and linguistically verified.  

Terms will still naturally vary in length and their 

level of fixedness, i.e. the strength of association 

between specific lexical items (Nattinger and 

DeCarrico, 1992), which can be measured using 

mutual information, z-score or t-score. Such 

variation of terms within a language may pose 

problems when attempting to translate term variants 

consistently into another language. Verbatim 

translations also often deviate from the established 

terminology in the target language, e.g. TermCymru 

in Welsh. Therefore, high-quality translations, 

performed by either humans or machines, require 

management of terminologies. Specialised text 

requires consistent use of terminology, where the 

same term is used consistently throughout a 

discourse to refer to the same concept. Very often, 

terms cannot be translated word for word. Therefore, 

most machine translation systems maintain a term 

base in order to support translations that use 

established terminology in the target language.  

Given a potentially unlimited number of domains 

as well as a dynamic nature of many domains (e.g. 

computer science) where new terms get introduced 

regularly, manual maintenance of one-to-one term 

bases for each pair of languages may become 

unmanageable. Where parallel corpora exist, 

automatic term recognition approaches can be used 

to extract terms and their translations, which can 

then be embedded into the term base to support 

machine translation of other document from the 

same domain. To that end, we are focusing on 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 1



 

 

comparing the performance of an unsupervised 

approach to automatic term recognition in two 

languages, Welsh and English, as an important step 

towards machine translation of specialised texts in 

the given languages.  

2 Methods 

2.1 Method overview 

FlexiTerm is a software tool that automatically 

identifies multi-word terms (MWTs) in text 

documents (Spasić et al., 2013). Given a domain-

specific corpus of plain text documents, it will 

extract MWTs in a form of a lexicon, which links 

together different forms of the same term including 

acronyms (Spasić, 2018). The most recent version 

can arrange the lexicon hierarchically (Spasić et al., 

2018). Table 1 provides examples of terms that were 

automatically extracted from patent applications 

from three different domains. 

 
Domain Term variants 

Civil engineering 

bottom hole assembly 

bottomhole assembly 

BHA 

Computing 

network functions virtualization 

NFV 

virtual network function 

VNF 

Transport 

lightning strike protection 

LSP 

protection against lightning strike 

Table 1: Examples of domain-specific terms 

FlexiTerm performs MWT recognition in two 

stages. First, MWT candidates are selected using 

lexico-syntactic patterns. This is based on an 

assumption that terms follow certain formation 

patterns (Justeson & Katz, 1995). Indeed, terms are 

associated with preferred phrase structures. They are 

typically noun phrases that consist of adjectives, 

nouns and prepositions. Terms rarely contain verbs, 

adverbs or conjunctions. 

Once potential MWT are identified, they are 

ranked using a measure that combines their length 

and frequency with an aim of identifying the longest 

repetitive patterns of word usage. This is based on an 

assumption that MWTs are expected to demonstrate 

collocational stability (Smadja, 1993). 

The original FlexiTerm method was implemented 

to support the English language. In the following 

sections, we describe the modifications that were 

required to support the same functionality in the 

Welsh language. 

2.2 Linguistic pre-processing 

FlexiTerm takes advantage of lexico–syntactic 

information to identify term candidates. Therefore, 

the input documents need to undergo linguistic pre–

processing in order to annotate them with relevant 

lexico–syntactic information. This process includes 

part-of-speech (POS) tagging, sentence splitting and 

tokenisation. The original implementation of 

FlexiTerm uses Stanford CoreNLP library 

(Toutanova et al., 2003) to support such processing 

in English. In the Welsh version, text is processed 

using the Canolfan Bedwyr Welsh POS Tagger 

(Jones, Robertson, and Prys, 2015) to tokenise the 

text and tag each token with an appropriate lexical 

category including end-of-sentence annotations. A 

subset of relevant tags from Canolfan Bedwyr Welsh 

language tag set (Robertson, 2015) were mapped to 

tags compatible  with the original version of 

FlexiTerm to minimise re-implementation (e.g. 

specific noun tags NM and NF were mapped to 

generic noun tag NN). This mapping was restricted 

to nouns, adjectives and prepositions only as these 

lexical classes are used to extract term candidates as 

explained in the following section. 

2.3 Term candidate extraction and 
normalisation 

Term candidates are extracted from pre-processed 

documents using pattern matching. The patterns 

describe the syntactic structure of targeted noun 

phrases (NPs). These patterns are treated as 

parameters of the method and as such can be 

modified as required. In general, NPs in Welsh and 

English follow different formation patterns. The 

main difference is concerned with headedness or 

directionality of NPs. Nearly all adjectives follow 

the noun in Welsh (Willis, 2006). For example, 

gorsaf ganolog, where the word ganolog means 

central, corresponds to the central station in English. 

Two lexico-syntactic patterns defined using regular 

expressions were used in our experiments, one to 

model simple (linear) NPs:  

NN (NN | JJ)
+
 

and the other one to model complex (hierarchical) 

NPs:  

NN (NN | JJ)* IN NN (NN | JJ)* 

Here, NN, JJ and IN correspond to noun, adjective 

and preposition respectively. 

Identification of term candidates is further refined 

by trimming the leading and trailing stop words. 

Stop word list has been created by automatically 

translating the English stop word list distributed with 

FlexiTerm (Spasić et al., 2013; Spasić, 2018), e.g. 

unrhyw (Engl. any), bron (Engl. nearly), etc. The 

translation was performed using the Canolfan 

Bedwyr Machine Translation Online API (Jones, 

2015). 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 2



 

 

To neutralise morphological and orthographic 

variation, all term candidates undergo normalisation, 

which involves lemmatisation of each token and 

removal of punctuation, numbers, stop words and 

any lowercase tokens with less than 3 characters. To 

address syntactic variation, the order is ignored by 

representing each candidate as a bag of words 

(BOW). For example, term candidates niwed i 

iechyd (Engl. damage to health) and iechyd niwed 

(Engl. health damage) are both represented as 

{niwed, iechyd}. 

Unlike English, Welsh syntax often requires 

words to inflect at the beginning depending on the 

preceding word or its role in the sentence (Harlow, 

1989). These morphological changes are known as 

mutations. For example, mwg tybaco (Engl. tobacco 

smoke) can appear as fwg tybaco in some contexts 

where soft mutation occurs. Lemmatisation will 

neutralise various word mutations. In the previous 

example, both mwg and fwg would be lemmatised to 

mwg. 

2.4 Lexical similarity 

As mentioned before, many types of morphological 

variation can be neutralised by lemmatisation. For 

instance, cerbyd (Engl. vehicle) and cerbydau (Engl. 

vehicles) will be conflated to the same lemma 

cerbyd. However, previously normalised term 

candidates may still contain typographical errors or 

spelling mistakes. Lexical similarity can be used to 

conflate these types of variation. For example, two 

normalised candidates {llywodraeth, cymru} and 

{llywrydraeth, cymru} (where llywrydraeth is a 

misspelling of the correct word that means 

government) can be conflated into the same 

normalised form {llywodraeth, llywrydraeth, 

cymru}. In FlexiTerm, similar tokens are matched 

using the Cysill Ar-Lein (Spelling and Grammar 

Checker) API (Robertson, 2015). 

2.5 Termhood calculation 

Calculation of termhood is based on the C-value 

formula (Frantzi et al., 2000), which is based on the 

idea of a cost criteria-based measure originally 

introduced for automatic collocation extraction (Kita 

et al., 1994): 

  
















)( if  ,))(
|)(|

1
)((||ln

)( if  ,)(||ln

)(

)(

tSsf
tS

tft

tStft

tvalueC

tSs

 

 

In this formula, |t| represents the number of content 

words in term candidate t, f(t) is the overall 

frequency of occurrence of term t which aggregates 

occurrences of the corresponding term variants. S(t) 

is a set of all other term candidates that are proper 

supersets of t. The termhood calculation module is 

language independent and as such required no 

modification for Welsh. 

2.6 Output 

Given a corpus of text documents, FlexiTerm 

outputs a ranked list of MWTs together with their 

termhood scores. Within this list, all term variants 

that share the same normalised form represented as a 

BOW are grouped together and ordered by their 

frequency of occurrence. Table 2 provides a sample 

output. We added English translation manually for 

the benefit of non-Welsh readers. 

 
Rank Term variants Translation Score 

1 
mwg ail-law 

fwg ail-law 

second-hand 

smoking 
3.4657 

2 
fwg tybaco amgylcheddol 

mwg tybaco amgylcheddol 

environmental 

tobacco smoke 
3.2958 

3 
cerbyd preifat 

cerbydau preifat 
private vehicle 2.7726 

4 

niwed difrifol i iechyd 

niwed i iechyd 

iechyd niwed 

damage to health 2.0794 

5 
Llywodraeth Cymru 
Lywodraeth Cymru 

Welsh Government 1.3863 

Table 2: Sample output 

3 Results 

3.1 Data 

We assembled three parallel corpora from three 

domains: education, politics and health. For each 

domain, a total of 100 publicly available documents 

were downloaded from the Welsh Government web 

site (Welsh Government, 2019). The Welsh 

Language Act 1993 obliges all public sector bodies 

to give equal importance to both Welsh and English 

when delivering services to the public in Wales. This 

means that all documents we collected from the 

Welsh Government web site were available in both 

languages. We collected a total of 100 documents in 

both languages for each of the three domains 

considered (600 in total). All documents were pre-

processed to remove HTML formatting and stored in 

a plain text format for further processing by 

FlexiTerm. Table 3 describes the properties of each 

corpus whose name consists of two letters – first 

indicating the language and the second indicating the 

domain (e.g. WH stands for Welsh+Health). 

 

Data  

set 

Size 

(KB) 
Sentences Tokens 

Distinct  

lemmas 

EE 138 869 24,580 2,517 

WE 141 913 27,847 2,204 

EP 116 831 21,406 2,444 

WP 120 877 23,884 2,352 

EH 92 596 16,614 2,063 

WH 96 615 18,975 1,960 

Table 3: Three parallel domain-specific corpora 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 3



 

 

3.2 Silver standard 

FlexiTerm had previously been thoroughly evaluated 

for English using the standard measures of precision 

and recall (Spasić et al., 2013). Their values were 

calculated against term occurrences that were 

annotated manually in five corpora used for 

evaluation. In this particular study, we are focusing 

on the actual terms extracted as a ranked list and not 

their specific occurrences in text. This simplifies the 

evaluation task as it does not require manual 

annotation of term occurrences in the three corpora 

(WE, WP and WH). Instead, only the ranked term 

lists need to be inspected. Moreover, the goal of this 

study is not to evaluate how well the Welsh version 

of FlexiTerm performs in general, but rather 

examine how it compares relative to the English 

version. In other words, by already knowing the 

performance of the English version of FlexiTerm 

from the previous study (Spasić et al., 2013), we can 

use its output on English versions of the three 

corpora (EE, EP and EH) as the "silver standard". 

The results obtained from the Welsh versions of the 

three corpora (WE, WP and WH) can then be 

matched against the silver standard. The only manual 

effort this approach requires is to map each 

automatically extracted term in Welsh to its 

equivalent in English (if an equivalent term has been 

recognised by FlexiTerm) and vice versa. Such 

mapping was performed by a Welsh-English 

proficient bilingual speaker. 

3.3 Evaluation 

We ran two versions of FlexiTerm against the three 

parallel corpora. Table 4 specifies the number of 

automatically recognised terms in each language. 

The Welsh output was evaluated against the 

corresponding English output (used here as the silver 

standard) in terms of precision and recall (also 

specified in Table 4). In other words, to calculate 

precision, for every Welsh term candidate, we 

checked whether its equivalent (i.e. translation) 

appeared in the English output. Vice versa, to 

calculate recall, for every English term candidate, we 

checked whether its equivalent appeared in the 

Welsh output.  

 

 
Welsh 

terms 

English 

terms 
P R F  

Health 90 120 75.0 55.1 63.5 0.6300 

Education 107 136 63.8 46.3 53.7 0.8425 

Politics 124 127 68.0 65.6 66.8 0.8550 

Average 107 128 68.9 55.7 61.3 0.7758 

Table 4: Evaluation results 

Across the three domains, the Welsh version of 

FlexiTerm performed more consistently in terms of 

precision, which was relatively high (i.e. >60%). 

However, the recall varied significantly across the 

three corpora ranging from as low as 46.3% to as 

high as 65.6%. 

3.4 Discussion 

We investigated the plausible causes affecting the 

sensitivity of the method in Welsh, which are 

associated with different steps of the FlexiTerm 

algorithm: (1) term candidate selection, (2) term 

candidate normalisation, (3) termhood calculation.  

First, term candidate selection depends on a set of 

lexico-syntactic patterns. If their coverage does not 

cover certain term formation patterns, then the 

corresponding terms will fail to be recognised. For 

example, the structure NN DT NN of the term 

rheoliad y cyngor (Engl.council regulation) does not 

match any of the patterns specified in Section 2.2, so 

further investigation is needed into the Welsh term 

formation patterns.  

Furthermore, term candidate selection depends on 

linguistic pre-processing (see Section 2.1). For 

example, even if a term's internal structure does 

comply with the given patterns, for the term to be 

selected that structure needs to be correctly 

recognised. In practice, a term's constituents may 

consistently be tagged incorrectly or ambiguously 

with POS information. For example, the term data 

biometrig (Engl. biometric data) was tagged as NN ? 

(where ? denotes an unknown tag)  instead of NN JJ. 

Such cases may fail to be matched with any of the 

given patterns, and, therefore, will also fail to be 

recognised. 

Once term candidates have been selected, their 

formal recognition as terms will depend on their 

frequency of occurrence. The overall frequency may 

be underestimated when different term variants fail 

to be conflated into a single term representative used 

to aggregate their individual frequencies. Term 

conflation depends on term normalisation, which 

involves (1) lemmatisation of individual words and 

(2) lexical similarity of their lemmas. The 

performance of the Welsh lemmatiser was found to 

be poorer than that of its English counterpart. 

Further, term normalisation depends on matching 

lexically similar tokens (see Section 2.4). Welsh 

orthography uses 29 letters out of which eight are 

digraphs. Morphology of the words is also more 

likely to vary than English depending on the dialect 

(e.g. northern vs. southern dialects). For example, 

hogyn is the northern variant of bachgen (Engl. boy). 

While the same approach to term normalisation is 

still valid for Welsh, it requires further investigation 

into adjusting the lexical similarity threshold. 

Finally, other than frequency, the calculation of 

the termhood also depends on the length of the term 

candidate (see Section 2.5). The equivalent terms in 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 4



 

 

the corresponding languages may not necessarily 

have the same number of content words due to 

compounding. For example, ansawdd gofal iechyd 

has got three content words whereas its English 

translation quality of healthcare has got two content 

words. This means that their termhood calculated 

using the C-value formula may have significantly 

different values. If this value does not meet the 

termhood threshold, the candidate will fail to be 

recognised as a term. In the worst case scenario, a 

MWT in one language (e.g. gofal iechyd) may be a 

singleton in the other language (e.g. healthcare), and 

as a single-word term it will fail to be identified as a 

term candidate.  

To check how well the respective terminologies 

are aligned, we compared whether the ranking of 

terms was similar. The C-value scores are replaced 

by their rank when they are sorted in the descending 

order. Note that such ranking represents a weak 

order because different terms may have the same C-

value and, therefore, the same rank. We can view the 

ranking of terms as an ordinal classification problem. 

This allows us to compare the differences in the 

ranking using weighted kappa coefficient (Cohen, 

1968), which is traditionally used to calculate inter-

annotator agreement. Unlike the original kappa 

coefficient, the weighted version accounts for the 

degree of disagreement by assigning different 

weights wi to cases where annotations differ by i 

categories. 

We reported the values of this statistics in Table 4 

for the terms recognised in both languages. In other 

words, the missing values, i.e. terms not recognised 

in one of the languages, were ignored. These values 

have already been accounted for by means of 

precision and recall. For the common terms in the 

domains of education and politics, at  > 0.8 the 

agreement of ranking is almost perfect. In the health 

domain, the agreement is still substantial at  > 0.6.         

4 Conclusions 

In this paper we presented an adaptation of a MWT 

recognition algorithm, originally implemented for 

English, for Welsh. We compared the performance 

of the Welsh version relative to the original English 

version. The results demonstrate that the brute-force 

adaptation, which is concerned only with the 

modules that support linguistic pre-processing (e.g. 

POS tagging), will successfully recognise the 

majority of MWTs proposed by the English version 

(P = 68.9%, R = 55.7%). It is expected that fine 

tuning the internal parameters of the method (e.g. 

lexico-syntactic patterns and lexical similarity 

threshold) as well as improving the performance of 

external parameters (e.g. POS tagging) would further 

improve the performance in Welsh. Successfully 

mapping MWTs between Welsh and English would 

improve the performance of machine translation of 

specialised texts, whose quality of translation 

depends largely on using established terminology 

instead of verbatim translations. 

5 Availability 

The software is shared under the BSD-3-clause 

license on GitHub: 

https://github.com/ispasic/FlexiTermCymraeg  

References 

Arppe, A. (1995) Term Extraction from Unrestricted Text. 

10th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, 

Helsinki, Finland 

Cohen, J. (1968) Weighted kappa: nominal scale 

agreement with provision for scaled disagreement or 

partial credit. Psychol Bull 70(4):213-20. 

Daille, B. (1996). Study and implementation of combined 

techniques for automatic extraction of terminology. In 

P. Resnik & J. Klavans (Eds.), The Balancing Act - 

Combining Symbolic and Statistical Approaches to 

Language, MIT Press, 49-66. 

Frantzi K., Ananiadou S. (1997) Automatic term 

recognition using contextual cues. 3rd DELOS 

Workshop on Cross-Language Information Retrieval, 

Zurich, Switzerland. 

Frantzi, K., Ananiadou, S., Mima, H. (2000). Automatic 

recognition of multi-word terms: the C-value/NC-value 

method. International Journal on Digital Libraries 2000, 

3:115–130. 

Harlow, S. (1989) The syntax of Welsh soft mutation. 

Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 7(3):289–316. 

Hersh, W., Campbell, E., Malveau, S., (1997). Assessing 

the feasibility of largescale natural language processing 

in a corpus of ordinary medical records: a lexical 

analysis. Annual AMIA Fall Symposium, 580–584. 

Jacquemin, C. (2001). Spotting and Discovering Terms 

through Natural Language Processing. Cambridge, 

Massachusetts, USA: MIT Press. 

Jones, D.B. (2015). Machine Translation Online API 

[https://github.com/PorthTechnolegauIaith/moses-

smt/blob/master/docs/APIArlein.md#moses-smt-

machine-translation-online-api]. 

Jones, D. B., Robertson, P., Prys, G. (2015). Welsh 

language lemmatizer API service 

[http://techiaith.cymru/api/lemmatizer/?lang=en]. 

Jones, D. B., Robertson, P., Prys, G. (2015). Welsh 

language Parts-of-Speech Tagger API Service 

[http://techiaith.cymru/api/parts-of-speech-tagger-

api/?lang=en]. 

Justeson, J. S., Katz, S. M. (1995) Technical terminology: 

some linguistic properties and an algorithm for 

identification in text. Natural Language Engineering 

1(1): 9-27. 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 5



 

 

Kageura, K., Umino, B. (1996). Methods of automatic 

term recognition - A review. Terminology 3(2): 259-

289. 

Kita K, Y. Kato, T. Omoto and Y. Yano (1994) A 

comparative study of automatic extraction of 

collocations from corpora: Mutual information vs. cost 

criteria. Journal of Natural Language Processing 1:21-

33. 

Nattinger, J., DeCarrico, J. (2011) Lexical phrases and 

language teaching. Oxford University Press. 

Robertson, P. (2015). Cysill Ar-lein 

[https://github.com/PorthTechnolegauIaith/cysill/blob/

master/doc/README.md#cysill-online-api]. 

Robertson, P. (2015). POS Tagger API 

[https://github.com/PorthTechnolegauIaith/postagger/bl

ob/master/doc/README.md#results]. 

Smadja, F. (1993) Retrieving collocations from text: 

Xtract. Computational Linguistics 19(1):143-177. 

Spasić, I., Greenwood, M., Preece, A., Francis, N., Elwyn, 

G. (2013) FlexiTerm: a flexible term recognition 

method. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 4: 27. 

Spasić, I. (2018) Acronyms as an integral part of multi-

word term recognition - A token of appreciation. IEEE 

Access 6: 8351-8363. 

Spasić, I., Corcoran, P., Gagarin, A., Buerki, A. (2018) 

Head to head: Semantic similarity of multi-word terms. 

IEEE Access 6: 20545-20557. 

Toutanova, K., Klein, D., Manning, C., Singer, Y. (2003) 

Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic 

dependency network. North American Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics on Human 

Language Technology, 173-180. 

Welsh Government (2019). Catalog Cyhoeddiadau 

Llywodraeth Cymru / Welsh Government Publications 

Catalogue 

[http://welshgovernmentpublications.soutron.net/public

ations/] 

Willis, D. (2006) Against N-raising and NP-raising 

analyses of Welsh noun phrases. Lingua 116(11): 1807-

1839. 

 
 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 6


