




































Machine Translation for Crimean Tatar to Turkish

Memduh Gökırmak
ÚFAL

Charles University
Prague, Czechia

memduhg@gmail.com

Francis Morton Tyers
Department of Linguistics

Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, USA

ftyers@iu.edu

Jonathan North Washington
Linguistics Department
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA, USA

jonathan.washington@swarthmore.edu

Abstract

In this paper a machine translation sys-
tem for Crimean Tatar to Turkish is pre-
sented. To our knowledge this is the first
Machine Translation system made available
for public use for Crimean Tatar, and the
first such system released as free and open
source software. The system was built using
Apertium1, a free and open source machine
translation system, and is currently unidi-
rectional from Crimean Tatar to Turkish.
We describe our translation system, evalu-
ate it on parallel corpora and compare its
performance with a Neural Machine Trans-
lation system, trained on the limited amount
of corpora available.

1 Introduction

This paper presents a Free/Open-Source prototype
shallow-transfer rule-based machine translation sys-
tem between Crimean Tatar and Turkish. The sys-
tem is built using Apertium (Forcada et al., 2010), a
free and open source platform that facilitates devel-
opment of rule-based machine translation systems
by providing tools that minimize the
The paper will be laid out as follows: Section 2

gives a short review of some previous work in the
area of Turkic–Turkic language machine transla-
tion; Section 3 introduces Crimean Tatar and Turk-
ish and compares their grammar; Section 4 de-
scribes the system and the tools used to construct
it; Section 5 gives an evaluation of the system and
compares it with a basic neural translation system,
© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.
1http://wiki.apertium.org

also presenting an example of a Crimean Tatar sen-
tence and its translations into Turkish by the systems
compared.. Finally Section 6 describes our aims for
future work and some concluding remarks.

2 Previous work
Within the Apertium project, work on several MT
systems between Turkic languages has been started
(Turkish–Kyrgyz, Azeri–Turkish, Tatar–Bashkir),
but until the release of the pair which this paper
presents, the Kazakh–Tatar system (Salimzyanov et
al., 2013) was the only one of release level quality,
and accordingly the only one released.
Besides these systems and those that are corpo-

rately available,2 a handful of previous works onma-
chine translation systems between Turkic languages
exist. MT systems have been reported that trans-
late between Turkish and other Turkic languages,
including Turkish–Crimean Tatar (Altıntaş, 2001),
Turkish–Azerbaijani (Hamzaoglu, 1993), Turkish–
Tatar (Gilmullin, 2008), and Turkish–Turkmen
(Tantuğ et al., 2007), though none of these have
been released to a public audience. In the develop-
ment of this system, we use another system devel-
oped within the Apertium project, a morphological
analyzer for Crimean Tatar (Tyers et al., 2019).

3 Languages
While Turkish and Crimean Tatar belong to differ-
ent branches of the Turkic family—Oghuz (South-
western Turkic) and Kypchak (Northwestern Tur-
kic) respectively—historical contact has been in-
tense enough to make the written standards of the
two languages somewhat mutually intelligible, al-
though differences in modern vocabulary prevent
more complete mutual intelligibility.
2e.g., Google Translate, http://translate.google.com

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 24



Turkish is the official language in Turkey, and an
official language in Cyprus. It is a recognized mi-
nority language in Greece, Iraq, Kosovo, Macedonia
and Romania. There are around 80 million fluent
speakers of Turksih, mostly living in Turkey (Eber-
hard et al., 2019). Crimean Tatar is a recognized
minority language in Ukraine and Romania. There
are over half a million speakers of Crimean Tatar,
who mostly live in the Crimean peninsula, Uzbek-
istan, Turkey, Romania, and Bulgaria (Eberhard et
al., 2019). The map in Figure 1 shows the two lan-
guages’ situation among other Turkic languages spo-
ken around the Black Sea.

Figure 1: Location of Turkish (tur) and Crimean Tatar (crh)
within the Black Sea area.

Turkish has undergone a purification process, re-
moving many Arabic and Persian-origin words that
it had in common with Crimean Tatar. Turkish has
been influenced by and borrowedwordsmainly from
French throughout the 20th century, while the major
influence on Crimean Tatar has been Russian. Con-
sider for example the loan word for “bus station”,
Turkish otogar < Fra. “auto- + gare” and Crimean
Tatar avtovokzal < Rus. “автовокзал”.

3.1 Orthographic and Phonological
differences

Both the orthographies and the phonologies of the
languages are remarkably close, especially in the
written standard, but a number of differences are
immediately observable at first glance.
The most obvious phonological differences be-

tween Crimean Tatar and Turkish are the existence
of three phonemes in Crimean Tatar that do not exist
in Turkish: /q/, /ʁ/, and /ŋ/.
There are also differences in the treatment of

loanwords. Word-final stops at the end of recent
loandwords are more consistently devoiced in Turk-
ish, as can be seen in Turkish mikrop ‘microbe’ and
Crimean Tatar mikrob, or sülfit ‘sulphide’ and sul-

fid. The affricate /ts/ is usually realised as /s/ in
Turkish, but preserved in Crimean Tatar. For ex-
ample, words like Crimean Tatar tsilindir ‘cylinder’,
tsellofan ‘cellophane’ tend to appear as silindir and
selofan in Turkish. However, examples such as
tsunami do appear in Turkish, and it may also be
important that Turkish loans of this sort tend to be
of French or English origin, while the Crimean Tatar
loanwords are usually from Russian.

3.1.1 Latin script
In recent years, Crimean Tatar has for the most

part employed a latin script almost identical to the
Turkish script with the exception of a few letters.
The letter q is used to represent /q/, a voiceless uvu-
lar stop in Crimean Tatar. Neither the sound nor
the letter exists in standard Turkish. Crimean Tatar
also tends to mark long a sounds /a:/ more consis-
tently with a circumflex, â, than Turkish, where the
character is used sporadically and for more ambigu-
ous purposes — i.e. it can also be used to mark
palatalisation. The letter ñ, also not used in Turk-
ish, is used for the dorsal nasal /ŋ/, which for the
most part no longer exists in Turkish. The use of the
letter ğ also differs. In Turkish, ğ represents what
was once a dorsal obstruent, but has since deleted in
modern standard Turkish and caused compensatory
lengthening of a preceding vowel, e.g. dağı [dɑː.ɯ]
‘mountain– .3’. In Crimean Tatar, the letter ğ
represents a uvular fricative /ʁ/, e.g. dağı [dɑʁɯ]
‘mountain– .3’.

3.1.2 Cyrillic
A Cyrillic alphabet based on that of Russian was

used officially from 1938 to the 1990s, and has still
not completely fallen out of use today. Unlike some
of the other Turkic alphabets, it did not feature spe-
cial characters that were not present in the Russian
alphabet. Consonants and vowels that did not ex-
ist in Russian were instead written using digraphs,
often involving the hard ъ or soft ь sign.
For example, the consonants represented as q, ğ

and ñ in the Latin script are represented as къ, гъ,
and нъ, respectively, in the Cyrillic orthography.
Also, the vowels represented with ü and ö in the
Latin script are represented with either уь and оь,
or у and о with a ь after the following consonant, or
just у and о in the presence of certain consonants.
See (Tyers et al., 2019) for more details, and how
the transliteration module is used to process Cyrillic
Crimean Tatar input.
The sentence “Welcome to Crimea!” is shown in

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 25



lang. / orthography text
Crim. Tatar Latin Qırımğa hoş keldiñiz!
Crim. Tatar Cyrillic Къырымгъа хош кельдинъиз!
Crim. Tatar IPA [qɯɾɯmʁɑ xoʃ keldiŋiz]
Turkish Kırım’a hoş geldiniz!
Turkish IPA [kɯɾɯmɑ hoʃ ɡʲɛldiniz]

Table 1: “Welcome to Crimea” in Latin and Cyrillic Crimean
Tatar orthographies with a Turkish translation.

the Latin and Cyrillic orthographies along with the
Turkish translation in Table 1.

3.2 Morphological Differences
The morpheme -A, which marks the aorist in
Crimean Tatar, serves as the optative mood in Turk-
ish. And while the Turkish aorist -Ir/-Ar exists in
Crimean Tatar, it is used as a future tense.
Both languages have two basic morphemes for

the past tense: Turkish -mIş and -DI and Crimean
Tatar -GAn3 and -DI. In Turkish, the distinction
is between non-first-hand evidential past and first-
hand evidential past, whereas in Crimean Tatar the
distinction is between non-recent past and recent
past. In Crimean Tatar, evidential tenses are usually
formed with the additional morpheme eken.
Furthermore, Crimean Tatar does not have a dis-

tinct strategy for marking progressive aspect, and
uses the same morpheme for both non-past and
present progressive. In Turkish, the progressive is
marked by -(I)yor, and can be used with a variety of
tenses. Both languages, however, have a progressive
construct used in more formal speech and writing,
-mAktA, which comprises a gerund in locative case.
A number of phonological differences exist be-

tween cognate inflectional morphemes in the two
lanugages: for example, the Crimean Tatar dative
case -GA, which can be realised as -ğa, -ge, -qa, -ke
depending on its phonological environment, corre-
sponds to -(y)A in Turkish, realised as -a, -e, -ya, ye
depending on phonological environment.

3.3 Syntactic differences
Turkish has a richer inventory of morphology relat-
ing to relative clauses, particularly verbal adverbs.
However, Crimean Tatar exhibits more auxiliary
verbs, which are used to add modal and aspectual
information to verb phrases.
3The Crimean Tatar morpheme -GAn is cognate to the Turkish
participle form -(y)An.

The languages also differ in their placement of
the polar question particle -mI relative to person
agreement suffixes: in Crimean Tatar the question
particle comes after person agreement, whereas in
Turkish it tends to come before. For example, in
Crimean Tatar bilesiñmi ‘do you know?’ the ques-
tion particle follows the 2nd person singular agree-
ment suffix -sIñ, whereas in the corresponding Turk-
ish form biliyormusun, the question particle preceds
the agreement suffix -sIn.

4 System
The system is based on the Apertiummachine trans-
lation platform (Forcada et al., 2010).4 While ini-
tially developed to translated between closely related
Romance languages such as Catalan and Spanish,
the system has evolved to handle different and more
distantly related languages. Apertium’s code and
data are licensed under the Free Software Founda-
tion’s General Public Licence5 (GPL) and all the
software and data for the 47 currently released lan-
guages (and other pairs being worked on) is available
for download from GitHub.6

4.1 Architecture of the system
The Apertium translation engine consists of a Unix-
style pipeline or assembly line with the following
modules (see Figure 2):

• A deformatter which encapsulates format in-
formation from the input in superblanks which
the other modules process as blanks between
words.

• A morphological analyser, implemented as a
transducer, which processes surface forms (SF)
(words, or, where detected, multiword lexical
units or MWLUs) and produces one or more
lexical forms (LF) consisting of lemma, part
of speech and morphological information.

• A module that disambiguates between possible
analyses depending on the context.

• A lexical transfer module which reads each
source-language (SL) LF and produces corre-
sponding target-language (TL) LFs by looking
them up in a bilingual dictionary encoded as an
FST compiled from the corresponding XML

4http://www.apertium.org
5https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
6https://github.com/apertium

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 26



lexical

transfer

morph.

analyser

morph.

disambig.

morph.

generator

post-

generator

SL

text

TL

text

deformatter

reformatter

structural

transfer

lexical

selection

Figure 2: System Architecture

file. The lexical transfer module may return
more than one TL LF for a single SL LF.

• A lexical selection module which uses rules
to choose the best translation of ambiguous
source language LFs based on context.

• Transfer rules that work with a shallow method
to change grammatical structures in the source
language to ones more befitting the target lan-
guage.

• A morphological generator that produces a TL
SF for each TL LF, by applying the correct in-
flection.

• A post-generator FST to deal with minor or-
thographic issues.

• A reformatter which de-encapsulates any for-
mat information.

The modules are discussed in the following sec-
tions.

4.2 Morphological transducers
The morphological transducers are based on the
popular Helsinki Finite State Technology (Linden
et al., 2011), a free/open-source reimplementation
of the Xerox finite-state toolchain. It provides both
the lexc formalism for defining lexicons and the
twol and xfst formalisms for modelling morpho-
phonological rules. Along with its open-source li-
cense, this toolkit is used as it — or the equivalent
XFST— has been widely used for other Turkic lan-
guages (Cöltekin, 2010; Altıntaş and Çiçekli, 2001;
Tantuğ et al., 2006; Washington et al., 2012; Tyers
et al., 2012b).
The morphologies of both languages are imple-

mented in lexc, and the morphophonologies of both
languages are implemented in twol. Use of lexc al-
lows for straightforward definition of different word
classes and subclasses. For example, Crimean Tatar

and Turkish have two classes of verbs that have dif-
ferent vowels in the aorist morpheme. Class mem-
bership cannot be predicted based on any phonolog-
ical criteria and is simply a lexical property of any
given verb. For example, the Turkish verbs ısır and
kır, “bite” and “break” respectively, inflect differ-
ently in the aorist, as ısırır and kırar. Despite the
otherwise identical rules of vowel harmony, these
two verbs require different paradigms for inflection.
This was implemented in lexc with two similar sets
of continuation lexica that lead to the appropriate
affixes for a given word class.
Twol allows for simple implementation of phono-

logical phenomena such as vowel harmony or voic-
ing/devoicing.

4.3 Bilingual lexicon
The bilingual lexicon currently contains 9,269 stem-
to-stem correspondences and was built by:

• Crossing a Crimean-Tatar to Russian + Rus-
sian to Turkish dictionary

• Searching for cognates using regular expres-
sions to change frequent differences, e.g.
Turkish hava, “air”, vs. Crimean Tatar ava, or
similarly hoca, “teacher”, vs. oca

• Consulting a Crimean Tatar to Russian Dictio-
nary manually7

• Consulting a Turkish (Ottoman) dictionary8

• Adding words provided by Kemal Altıntaş,
used in his work on Turkish to Crimean Tatar
machine translation (Altıntaş, 2001).

Entries are mostly one-to-one stem correspon-
dences given with their parts of speech, but some
also have ambiguous translations.
7http://medeniye.org/lugat
8http://lugatim.org

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 27



4.4 Disambiguation rules

We use Constraint Grammar (CG) (Karlsson et al.,
1995) for contextual rule-based disambiguation be-
tween the possible analyses the analyzer produces
for each surface form. The version of the formalism
used is vislcg3.9 The analyzer outputs are fairly am-
biguous with an average of around 2.13 analyses per
form for Crimean Tatar and 2.09 for Turkish. Using
the disambiguator, ambiguity is currently down to
1.18 analyses per form for Crimean Tatar and 1.46
for Turkish.
The level of ambiguity has still not converged to

near 1, due to many ambiguous affixes that both lan-
guages have, particularly in non-finite verbal mor-
phology. However the downside to this is minimized
by the fact that the closely related grammar of the
two languages means that the very same ambiguity
can often carry over in translation without causing
an error.

4.5 Lexical selection rules

We use the Apertium lexical selection module (Ty-
ers et al., 2012a).
In some instances, even word translations that are

direct cognates may be used in different contexts
in the source and target languages. For example,
Crimean Tatar vaqıt is a word expressing a temporal
concept, either a certain point in time or a duration.
Turkish has a cognate with very similar meanings,
vakit, but different contexts elicit different interpre-
tations. Certain collocations such as bir vaqıt, “(for)
some time”, require the use of another translation
in Turkish, süre. A lexical selection rule to choose
the translation süre when it occurs with bir is writ-
ten to make sure the correct translation is produced.
Similarly the Crimean Tatar word zümre has a di-
rect cognate in Turkish, however when it is used in
the sense of a language family, it must be translated
into Turkish as aile, literally “family.” The system
currently has a total of 13 lexical selection rules.

4.6 Structural transfer rules

Structural transfer rules are written in XML files
and are applied left-to-right and longest match first.
With equal length matches the preceding rule in the
file prevails. There are currently 53 rules for transla-
tion from Crimean Tatar to Turkish, and 9 for Turk-
ish to Crimean Tatar.

crh Sentence Kerekmey maña öyle feodallar.
Ref. Translation Lazım değil bana öyle feodaller.
RBMT Output Gerekmez bana öyle feodallar.
NMT Output Gerekmez bana böyle otlaklar.

Table 2: Example of MT output for a crh input sentence.

5 Evaluation

All evaluation was tested against version 0.2.1, or
r53f133c in the Apertium GitHub.

5.1 Coverage
Lexical coverage of the system is calculated over
freely available corpora of Crimean Tatar. Two
years worth of content (2014 and 2015) from
Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty (RFERL)’s
Crimean Tatar service,10 as well as a recent dump
of Wikipedia’s articles in Crimean Tatar were used.

Corpus Coverage Wordcount
Krymr2014 92.6% 874,662
Krymr2015 93.7% 798,666
Wikipedia 89.7% 198,178
Total 92.8 2,032,300

Table 3: Coverage over corpora. We define coverage here as
the percentage of words in the corpus that the system analyzes
and produces a translation for.

As shown in Table 3, the naïve coverage of the
Crimean Tatar-Turkish MT system over the news
corpora approaches that of a broad-coverage MT
system, and has less than a tenth of words unknown.
The coverage over the Wikipedia corpus is slightly
worse, due to the fact that this corpus is “dirtier”:
it contains orthographical errors, wiki code, repeti-
tions, as well as quite a few proper nouns.

5.2 Translation Quality
Table 2 shows a Crimean Tatar sentence and its
translations by both our RBMT system and theNMT
system. In both the sentence “I don’t need feudal
types like that,” is translated with gerekmez instead
of the equivalent lazım değil. The RBMT preserves
the meaning but doesn’t produce the correct vowel
harmony in feodaller, and the NMT produces the
translation “I don’t need pastures like this.”
9http://visl.sdu.dk/cg3.html
10https://ktat.krymr.com/

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 28



We use the metrics BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002)
andWord Error Rate, a metric based on Levenshtein
distance (Levenshtein, 1966) to evaluate our system
on parallel corpora and compare it with the per-
formance of a Neural Machine Translation system
trained on the same corpora. We use an NMT-Small
model from the OpenNMT (Klein et al., 2017)
framework for the neural translation. The model we
train is word-level, using Byte-pair Encoding (Sen-
nrich et al., 2015).
To evaluate our system the need arises for par-

allel corpora. While aligned sentences ready for
MT training are not available, a number of aca-
demic works published in Turkey provide Crimean
Tatar–language text along with Turkish translations.
These works are mostly collections of folk tales
(Bakırcı, 2010) and selections from Crimean Tatar
literature in the Soviet period, from sources includ-
ing the literary journal Yıldız (Atıcı, 2008; Hen-
dem, 2008) and the works of Ayder Osman (Akın,
2014). Other sources deal with the literature of a
certain period (Hakyemez, 2007) or social/political
phenomenon (Türkaslan, 2015). We align and to-
kenize the sentences in these parallel corpora us-
ing hunalign (Varga et al., 2007) and the tokenizer
script provided with the Moses statistical translation
toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). We are in negotiation
with the rights holders to release the gathered corpus
under an open licence.

Corpus crh Tokens tur Tokens
Yıldız (Volume I) 192,671 190,769
Yıldız (Volume II) 161,047 160,420
Ayder Osman 22,190 21,950
Poverty Literature 23,701 24,185
Folk Tales 84,499 78,998

Table 4: Parallel Corpora. We join together all of these cor-
pora except for the folk tales, and split this in a 90-5-5 split. We
use the 5% test portion and the folk tales to test and compare
the NMT and

We use all of the parallel corpora listed in Table 4
except for the folk tales in NMT training, random-
izing the order of their sentences and splitting them
into train, testing and development sets of roughly
90%, 5% and 5% in proportion. This amounts to
about 360 thousand tokens for each language in the
training corpora, 20 thousand each for the develop-
ment corpus and again 20 thousand each for testing.
The folk tales corpus has a slightly different ortho-
graphic system from standard Crimean Tatar, and is

Corpus System BLEU WER
Test Corpus RBMT 20.50 54.83%
Test Corpus NMT 7.88 76.25%
Test Corpus None 8.29 69.49%
Folk Tales RBMT 22.07 52.63%
Folk Tales NMT 2.27 85.11%
Folk Tales None 9.04 67.87%

Table 5: Evaluation of Translation Quality. “None” simply
measures the BLEU and WER scores on corresponding un-
translated parallel sentences in each language.

non-trivial to convert into the standard. We use this
corpus as another test corpus, to compare the perfor-
mance of our RBMT (Rule-based Machine Trans-
lation) and NMT (Neural Machine Translation) sys-
tems in situations showing orthographic or dialectal
variety.
Table 5 compares the performance of RBMT and

NMT on the system, and provides scores for when
translation is not done at all in the rows where the
System column is filled with “None.” The Rule-
based system performs better than the Neural sys-
tem, in both the WER and BLEU metrics. A num-
ber of reasons could factor into this. The ortho-
graphic and dialectal variety of the texts used in
the aligned corpora may have hindered learning and
generalization in the NMT system. The RBMT sys-
tem is to some degree robust to this, as adding fre-
quent variants of frequent words is a simple issue,
and one that we frequently addressed while devel-
oping the RBMT system on theWikipedia and news
corpora. It should be noted that none of the paral-
lel corpora used for evaluation were used while de-
veloping the RBMT system, including the train and
development sets.
The majority of RBMT errors are mostly due

either to mistakes and gaps in the morphophonol-
ogy components and disambiguation errors or input
words being out of the vocabulary. The NMT er-
rors, however, seem to stem from simple lack of
data. The figures achieved given only 360 thousand
tokens of training data on each side seems to be
consistent with experiments conducted in the liter-
ature concerning the relation of NMT performance
and the amount of data (Koehn and Knowles, 2017).
Taken along with the relative lack of standardization
of the language, this should account to some degree
for the poor performance.
The sheer similarity (and not inconsiderable mu-

tual intelligibility) of the two languages also benefits

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 29



the RBMT and the scenario where no system at all
is used, in comparison to an NMT system that does
not have adequate data to encode and decode input
text properly.

6 Conclusion
To our knowledge we have presented the first ever
publicly available MT system between Crimean
Tatar and Turkish, which is available online for use
on Apertium’s website.11 It has near production-
level coverage, but is rather prototype-level in terms
of the number of rules. Although the impact of
this relatively low number of rules on the quality of
translation is extensive, the outlook is promising and
the current results suggest that a high-quality transla-
tion betweenmorphologically-rich agglutinative lan-
guages is possible.
We have evaluated our system on an amount of

parallel corpora gathered by linguistics departments
in Turkey, and compared the performance with that
of an NMT system trained on these corpora. The
results indicate that even in 2019, it is feasible to
use RBMT between closely related, morphologi-
cally rich languages when there are not enough re-
sources to train the cutting edge in Neural Machine
Translation.
We plan to continue development on the pair;

the coverage of the system is already quite high,
although we intend to increase it to 95% on the
larger monolingual corpora we have — we estimate
that this will mean adding around 5,000 new stems
and take 1–2 months. The remaining work will
be improving the quality of translation by adding
more rules, starting with the CG module. The long-
term plan is to integrate the data created with other
open-source data for Turkic languages in order to
make transfer systems between all the Turkic lan-
guage pairs. Related work is currently ongoing with
Kazakh–Turkish, Uyghur–Turkish, Sakha–Kazakh
and (Kazan) Tatar–Turkish. The system is avail-
able as free/open-source software under the GNU
GPL, and the whole system may be downloaded
from GitHub.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their insightful comments on the paper and our
colleagues Remziye Berberova, Darya Kavitskaya
and Nick Howell who contributed to the develop-
ment of the components of the system specific to
11https://www.apertium.org/?dir=crh-tur

Crimean Tatar. The work was done with financial
support from Google’s Summer of Code program12,
for which we are also grateful.

References
Akın, Serkan. 2014. Review of the stories named
“bizim gemimiz”, “yıllar ve dostlar”, “biz bir dünyada
yaşaymız” and “demircinin teklifi” by ayder osman.
Master’s thesis, Gazi University, Ankara.

Altıntaş, Kemal. 2001. Turkish to Crimean Tatar ma-
chine translation system. Master’s thesis, Bilkent Uni-
versity.

Altıntaş, Kemal and Ilyas Çiçekli. 2001. A morphologi-
cal analyser for Crimean Tatar. In Proceedings of the
10th Turkish Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and
Neural Networks (TAINN’2001), pages 180–189.

Atıcı, Abdülkadir. 2008. Crimean Tatar Compilations
from the Journal Yıldız (Volume I). Master’s thesis,
Ege University, İzmir.

Bakırcı, Nedim. 2010. Crimean Tatar Folk Tales. Kö-
men Publishing, Konya, Turkey.

Cöltekin, Çağrı. 2010. A freely available morphological
analyzer for Turkish. In LREC, volume 2, pages 19–
28.

Eberhard, David M., Gary F. Simons, and Charles D.
Fennig, editors. 2019. Ethnologue: Languages
of the World. SIL International, Dallas, Texas,
twenty-second edition. Online version: http://
www.ethnologue.com.

Forcada, Mikel L., Mireia Ginestí Rosell, Jacob Nord-
falk, Jim O’Regan, Sergio Ortiz-Rojas, Juan An-
tonio Pérez-Ortiz, Gema Ramírez-Sánchez, Felipe
Sánchez-Martínez, and Francis M. Tyers. 2010.
Apertium: a free/open-source platform for rule-based
machine translation platform. Machine Translation.

Gilmullin, R. A. 2008. The Tatar-Turkish machine
translation based on the two-level morphological ana-
lyzer. Interactive Systems and Technologies: The Prob-
lems of Human-Computer Interaction, pages 179–186.

Hakyemez, Betül. 2007. Selected Stories from Crimean
Tatar Literature in the period 1928-1937. Master’s
thesis, Marmara University, Istanbul.

Hamzaoglu, Ilker. 1993. Machine translation from
Turkish to other Turkic languages and an implementa-
tion for the Azeri language. Master’s thesis, Bogazici
University, Istanbul.

Hendem, Elif. 2008. Crimean Tatar Compilations from
the Journal Yıldız (Volume II). Master’s thesis, Ege
University, İzmir.

12summerofcode.withgoogle.com

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 30



Karlsson, Fred, Atro Voutilainen, Juha Heikkilae, and
Arto Anttila. 1995. Constraint Grammar: a language-
independent system for parsing unrestricted text, vol-
ume 4. Walter de Gruyter.

Klein, Guillaume, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean Senel-
lart, and Alexander M Rush. 2017. OpenNMT:
Open-source toolkit for neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.02810.

Koehn, Philipp and Rebecca Knowles. 2017. Six chal-
lenges for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03872.

Koehn, Philipp, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
BrookeCowan,Wade Shen, ChristineMoran, Richard
Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
45th annual meeting of the association for computa-
tional linguistics companion volume proceedings of the
demo and poster sessions, pages 177–180.

Levenshtein, Vladimir I. 1966. Binary codes capable
of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. In
Soviet physics doklady, volume 10, pages 707–710.

Linden, Krister, Miikka Silfverberg, Erik Axelson,
Sam Hardwick, and Tommi Pirinen, 2011. HFST–
Framework for Compiling and Applying Morphologies,
volume 100 of Communications in Computer and In-
formation Science, pages 67–85.

Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting on association for computational
linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Salimzyanov, Ilnar, J Washington, and F Tyers. 2013.
A free/open-source Kazakh-Tatar machine translation
system. Machine Translation Summit XIV.

Sennrich, Rico, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2015. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909.

Tantuğ, A Cüneyd, Eşref Adalı, and Kemal Oflazer.
2006. Computer analysis of the Turkmen language
morphology. In Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 186–193. Springer.

Tantuğ, A Cüneyd, Eşref Adalı, and Kemal Oflazer.
2007. A mt system from turkmen to turkish employ-
ing finite state and statistical methods.

Tyers, Francis M., Felipe Sánchez-Martínez, Mikel L
Forcada, et al. 2012a. Flexible finite-state lexical se-
lection for rule-based machine translation.

Tyers, Francis M., Jonathan North Washington, Ilnar
Salimzyanov, and Rustam Batalov. 2012b. A proto-
type machine translation system for Tatar and Bashkir
based on free/open-source components. In First
Workshop on Language Resources and Technologies
for Turkic Languages, page 11.

Tyers, Francis M., Jonathan North Washington, Darya
Kavitskaya, Memduh Gökırmak, Nick Howell, and
Remizye Berberova. 2019. A biscriptual morpholog-
ical transducer for Crimean Tatar. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on the Use of Computational Meth-
ods in the Study of Endangered Languages.

Türkaslan, Nesibe. 2015. Poverty Literature in Crimean
Tatars [sic]. Master’s thesis, Gazi University, Ankara.

Varga, Dániel, Péter Halácsy, András Kornai, Viktor
Nagy, László Németh, and Viktor Trón. 2007. Par-
allel corpora for medium density languages. Amster-
dam Studies In The Theory And History Of Linguistic
Science Series 4, 292:247.

Washington, Jonathan, Mirlan Ipasov, and Francis Ty-
ers. 2012. A finite-state morphological transducer for
Kyrgyz. In Chair), Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference,
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uğur
Doğan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion
Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors,
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Istan-
bul, Turkey, may. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 31


