




































Verb-Second Effect on Quantifier Scope Interpretation


Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 134–139
Minneapolis, USA, June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

134

Verb-second Effect on Quantifier Scope Interpretation

Asad Sayeed
Dept. of Philosophy, Linguistics,

and Theory of Science
University of Gothenburg, Sweden

asad.sayeed@gu.se

Matthias Lindemann1, Vera Demberg1,2
1Dept. of Lang. Sci. and Tech.

2Dept. of Math. and CS
Saarland University, Germany
malinux@t-online.de

vera@coli.uni-saarland.de

Abstract
Sentences like Every child climbed a tree have
at least two interpretations depending on the
precedence order of the universal quantifier
and the indefinite. Previous experimental work
explores the role that different mechanisms
such as semantic reanalysis and world knowl-
edge may have in enabling each interpreta-
tion. This paper discusses a web-based task
that uses the verb-second characteristic of Ger-
man main clauses to estimate the influence of
word order variation over world knowledge.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we present results from an online
cloze (fill-in-the-blank) experiment in German de-
signed to exploit the verb-second syntax of Ger-
man main clauses in order to understand the re-
lationship between factors involved in quantifier
scope ambiguity resolution. An example of quan-
tifier scope ambiguity in English is the sentence
“Everybody loves somebody”, which has at least
two readings: either that (a) every person in the
universe of discourse loves some person, but there
are possibly different people being loved (linear
scope), or (b) that there is exactly one person who
is loved by everyone in the universe of discourse1

(inverse scope).
Humans are both able to perceive scope am-

biguities and resolve them in context with rela-
tive ease—such that reading (a) is quickly pre-
ferred, even though it is a seemingly “out-of-
context” example. Potential ambiguities are actu-
ally relatively common (Koller et al., 2010), even
if example sentences used to understand their for-
mal properties seem rather contrived. Indeed, the

1Taken in a narrowly logical way, reading (b) permits
(a) to be true. Pragmatically speaking, however, reading (a)
suggests that there are likely multiple/different people being
loved. See Radó and Bott (2018) for an argument that the
fine-grained logical implication is important from a process-
ing point of view.

study of the formal properties of scope-ambiguous
sentences has a long history in formal semantics
(Ruys and Winter, 2011), especially as it pertains
to the conditions under which ambiguous readings
are available. However, psycholinguistic mod-
els of how scope ambiguities are resolved (as op-
posed to merely being made formally available) is
a much less developed area of research, but whose
development is necessary for, e.g., better compu-
tational models of language understanding.

The key issue is the integration of multiple fac-
tors: local context, background world-knowledge,
“classical” syntax-semantics interface constraints,
and so on. For example, in the two readings of
Every child climbed a tree, common sense gener-
ally suggests that the children are climbing mul-
tiple trees, which may come from general overall
experience of tree-climbing, the affordances (Gib-
son, 1977) of trees, and so on. Nevertheless, sim-
ilar sentences have more easily available inverse
scope readings, such as Every jeweler appraised
a diamond. When, if at all, does the human pro-
cessor “activate” the knowledge that both readings
are available (from formal syntactic and semantic
structure), and how does this formal knowledge
interact with lexical-pragmatic knowledge about
trees or diamonds?

2 Background

Early work (e.g., Fodor, 1982) suggested that
quantifiers and word order interact, such that when
an existential quantifier precedes a universal quan-
tifier, the processor must act to reverse the linear
order in order to get a plural reading for the ex-
istential quantifier, and vice versa. Various psy-
cholinguistic techniques have been brought to bear
on the question, especially using the English lan-
guage as the experimental medium, among them
judgement studies, eye-tracking, self-paced read-



135

(1) Jeder
Every

Spion
spyNOM

hat
has

diesen/einen/diese
this/a/these

Auftrag/Aufträge
order(s)ACC

erhalten.
received.

[Der/die
[The

Auftrag/Aufträge
order(s)

war(en)]
was/were]

gefährlich
dangerous

und
and

riskant.
risky.

‘Every spy received this/a/these order(s). [The order(s) was/were] dangerous and risky.’

(2) Diesen/Einen/Diese
This/A/These

Auftrag/Aufträge
order(s)ACC

hat
has

jeder
every

Spion
spyNOM

erhalten.
received.

[Der/die
[The

Auftrag/Aufträge
order(s)

war(en)]
was/were]

gefährlich
dangerous

und
and

riskant.
risky.

‘Every spy received this/a/these order(s). [The order(s) was/were] dangerous and risky.’

Figure 1: Stimulus example.

ing, and event-related potentials (ERP). Kurtz-
man and MacDonald (1993) performed a founda-
tional judgement study in English with a “context-
continuation” experimental paradigm, where an
ambiguously quantified (universal-existential or
existential-universal) sentence (the “context”) is
followed by another sentence (the “continuation”)
that contains a singular or plural reference to the
existentially quantified noun phrase in the context.

(3) Context: Every gardener watered a plant.
Continuation: The plant was tall and sturdy.

Example (3) illustrates the context-continuation
paradigm. In this case, the singular subject of the
continuation requires an inverse scope interpreta-
tion of the context.

Testing the acceptability of these sentence pairs
is more sensitive to online processing than ask-
ing for explicit interpretation outright, and Kurtz-
man and MacDonald used judgement tasks of this
nature and found no single principle under which
a preference for particular interpretation could be
identified. They tested swapping the linear or-
der of quantifiers (e.g., “A gardener watered ev-
ery plant”), and found no effect of linear order.
One problem with such a study is that the quanti-
fiers are swapped while keeping the semantic roles
filled by the same nouns, so that it is not pos-
sible to separate the effect of linear order from
common-sense interpretation.

Filik et al. (2004) performed judgement and
eye-tracking studies on English sentences by us-
ing double object constructions where the direct
and indirect objects had ambiguous universal and
existential quantifier scopes. It is possible to swap
these in English. This is under a theory where
a grammatical hierarchy of constituents (Ioup,
1975) conflicts with linear order. They found that

the linear order effect interacts with the grammati-
cal hierarchy effects in both experimental modali-
ties. However, double object constructions involve
either an optional argument or one of a subset of
verbs representing events that obligatorily require
indirect objects, restricting the ability of this type
of study to explore the role of world knowledge2.

Dwivedi (2013) performed a reading-time study
based on stimuli similar to those of Kurtzman
and MacDonald, with universal-existential order
only for the context sentence and found no sig-
nificant effects reflecting an online reanalysis pro-
cess or a competition process in the manner of
Kurtzman and MacDonald (1993) or Filik et al.
(2004). On the contrary, in a question-answering
task after each sentence pair, participants remem-
bered and identified singular continuations at be-
low chance level, being strongly guided by prag-
matic intuitions. Dwivedi takes this to reflect
a “heuristic first, algorithmic second” theory of
scope processing—that the human processor may
be able to reanalyze ambiguous quantifiers, but
does not do so unless very strongly provoked to
do so, and instead relies almost entirely on back-
ground and contextual knowledge.

Subject-verb-object (SVO) transitive construc-
tions present a greater opportunity to explore the
role of semantic events and associated knowl-
edge than double object constructions, but use of
the English language presents some limitations.
A better exploration of the roles of algorithmic
knowledge, linear order, and reanalysis processes
in quantifier scope ambiguity processing could be
performed in a language that allows for variation
of order of the quantifiers without a fundamen-
tal change to the semantics of the situation be-

2See Dwivedi (2013) for further discussion of Filik et al.’s
stimuli.



136

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.2

0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2

p(Plural|SVO)

p
(P

lu
ra

l|
O

V
S

)
Article type

Indefinite

Plural definite

Singular definite

Figure 2: Correlation plot of the probability of plural interpretations given SVO order vs. OVS order, for indefinite,
definite singular, and definite plural conditions. Data ellipses illustrate means and standard deviations for each
condition in two dimensions (Friendly et al., 2013).

ing represented. Simply swapping object and sub-
ject in simple declarative clauses is unacceptable
in English, but much less so in verb-second, case-
marking languages like German.

Radó and Bott (2018) investigate the role of
quantifier distributivity relative to linear order us-
ing a series of context-continuation judgement
tasks in German. Part of their manipulation
is main-clause SVO order vs OSV given Ger-
man’s verb-second characteristic; in German main
clauses, quantifier scope ambiguities are possible.
However, they use visual aids to explicitly dis-
ambiguate the intended interpretation of the sen-
tence, so that the judgement task is about match-
ing the appropriateness of the sentence to the im-
age. Thus, world knowledge effects are factored
out of their experiment.

In this work, we instead exploit the SVO/OVS
flexibility of German main clauses to better char-
acterise how linear order, formal semantic struc-
ture, and world knowledge work together to
produce interpretations. We hypothesize that
Dwivedi’s manipulation yields her result for En-
glish because English-speakers rarely, if ever, ex-
pect to see linear order variation. The low ac-
ceptability of an OVS order in declarative sen-
tences in English means that English users have
a much lower expectation of having to reverse
the observed linear scope order in order to align
their pragmatically-driven interpretation with the
observed sentence. Correspondingly, English-

speakers only infrequently invoke “algorithmic”
processing mechanisms. German-speakers find
OVS order much more acceptable than English-
speakers. This means that German-speakers are
more likely to confront variation in word order,
leading to mismatches between world knowledge
and linear order. Since German-speakers expect to
confront mismatches more often, syntactic and se-
mantic structure, including word order, will have
a more visible effect on number interpretation,
providing more visible resistance to the influence
of background knowledge. In order to test this,
we make use of a web-based cloze task under
the context-continuation paradigm, giving partic-
ipants a free choice of interpretation.

3 Methods and Materials

We translated the English stimuli from Dwivedi
(2013) to German, making adjustments or replace-
ments where the syntax or semantics did not work
with normal German usage. For the German con-
text sentences, we varied the word order from
SVO to OVS order3 and we had three conditions
for the object article: definite singular, indefinite,
and definite plural, for six total conditions. The

3A reviewer points out that our experiment could work,
in theory, for any language where the object can optionally
precede the subject in a declarative main clause, not merely
for verb-second languages. We consider this highly plausible,
but we chose not to commit to a more ambitious hypothesis
without further analysis of the associated linguistic phenom-
ena beyond Germanic verb-second.



137

b Std. Error z Pr(> |z|)
Intercept -1.1176 0.3732 -2.994 0.00275 **

Linearity(SVO) 0.9260 0.2844 3.256 0.00113 **

Signif. codes: 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1

Table 1: Fitted mixed-effects model of word order on plural interpretation for objects with the indefinite article.

continuation sentences were supplied with a blank
space for the subject and verb, with a final com-
plement describing the targeted subject.

Examples (1) and (2) represent the stimuli we
used. The italicized portions are the intended
cloze fillers: participants are expected to fill in the
subject and the verb, which would thereby reveal
their intuitions about number.

The stimuli were randomized into six lists, and
24 fillers were created and added to each list. The
stimuli were presented using Lingoturk4, a work-
bench for developing and hosting web-based ex-
periments (Pusse et al., 2016), one stimulus per
screen, after two training exercises. A mix of par-
ticipants were recruited, both native-speaker un-
dergraduate students at a university in a German-
speaking country and online via Prolific5, which
permits selection by native language.

The collected data (filled blanks) were then
coded by a native speaker for whether they repre-
sented an unambiguously singular or plural judge-
ment, were ambiguous (e.g., the participant substi-
tuted a subject-verb combination that did not refer
to the object of the context sentence), or were un-
interpretable.

4 Results and Discussion

There were a total of 66 participants, of which 31
were students and 35 were Prolific participants.
The student participants were collected first, upon
which we discovered that two items had errors.
We discarded the data for those items, corrected
the errors, and ran the full set with the Prolific par-
ticipants. This yielded 1546 responses, 1236 of
which were unambiguous references to the object
of the context sentence with interpretable num-
ber6.

We expected from their semantic interpretations
that singular and plural definite articles would pro-
duce strong singular and plural interpretations re-

4https://github.com/FlorianPusse/
Lingoturk

5https://www.prolific.ac
6The data are available upon request to first author.

spectively, regardless of any underlying pragmatic
bias of the item. We plotted the probability of
plural interpretation per item given SVO order vs.
OVS order (figure 2). It illustrated that singular
and plural interpretations are, as expected, little
affected by order when the determiner is definite:
they tend to agree with the number of the deter-
miner, and items in the plot cluster near zero prob-
ability of plural interpretation for the singular def-
inite condition and high probability of plural inter-
pretation in the plural definite condition. With the
indefinite article, however, we obtain nearly the
full range of plural biases, with some items hav-
ing low plural probability with either word order
and some high.

We fitted a binomial logit regression model with
mixed effects for the indefinite article condition
under the hypothesis Plurality ∼ Linearity +
(1|Item) + (1 + Linearity |Participant); that is,
the plural response has a fixed effect of linearity
with a random intercept per item (given variation
in the overall semantic plural bias of the item) and
a correlated random intercept and slope for linear-
ity relative to participant, reflecting overall indi-
vidual tendencies to give plural interpretations and
individual effects of linear order. This was per-
formed in R under the lme4 package (Bates et al.,
2014). The fixed-effects model output is presented
in table 1. This model produces a significant ef-
fect on plural interpretation in indefinite order sen-
tences, with log-odds ratio b = 0.926 in favour of
a plural interpretation when the context sentence
is in SVO order.

While the plurality of each item is highly pre-
served in either order, OVS items are indeed less
likely to be interpreted as plural, resulting in a
slope of the fitted line for the indefinite condition
in figure 2 that is visibly less than 1 and reflecting
the outcome of the binomial logit regression.

Dwivedi’s self-paced reading results in English
present a picture of a system that employs reanal-
ysis on ambiguous scopes mostly in extremis, but
otherwise relies principally on lexical-pragmatic
associations in interpretation. Our results do not



138

Fronted objects (OVS)
= fewer plural responses

 TRUE       FALSE

Plural responses highly
correlated between

SVO and OVS

World-knowledge
dominates

SVO/OVS correlation and 
significant OVS effect hold 

mainly for indefinite

Syntactic/linear
order effect
dominates

             TRUE
FALSE

              TRUE
FALSE

        

Syntax-mediated
formal sem.-prag.

interaction

Syntax-pragmatics
interaction

Figure 3: Possible outcomes of the experiment relative
to hypothesis over dominant mechanisms of ambiguous
quantifier scope processing.

challenge the centrality of background world and
lexical knowledge, but instead, reflect a some-
what stronger role for the “algorithmic” compo-
nent of scope processing. Specifically, German
speakers’ syntactic expectations admit OVS orders
more naturally than English speakers, so that when
an OVS order is encountered, it creates a “head-
wind”, triggered by an initial indefinite article, that
the powerful force of world knowledge must over-
come. This mechanism is specifically invoked by
the appearance of an indefinite object noun phrase
in the initial position, while singular definite arti-
cles totally override world knowledge regardless
of order.

Dwivedi measured plural bias for her origi-
nal 2013 stimuli using a forced choice singu-
lar/plural interpretation task. We instead opted for
a cloze task, which we believe has higher ecolog-
ical validity—the task avoids forcing participants
to choose among options when they may not feel
that any of them are suitable or natural. A poten-
tial disadvantage of free completions is that par-
ticipants sometimes filled the subject/verb field in
a manner that would not let us determine whether
they intended a singular or a plural reference to the
object phrase or with a nonsense response; these
responses had to be discarded before analysis. In
our case, this happened in 20% of the data, still

leaving us with a sufficient amount of interpretable
data. The advantage of this approach in the in-
vestigation of quantifier scope processing is that
it does not explicitly call on participants to think
about and judge plurality as a concept, but rather
to come up with a phrase that makes sense to them
in context.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

Figure 3 provides a visual description of the hy-
pothesis space we considered for this experiment.
To the proposition that world knowledge is overly
dominant, we found that our result pushes the
needle back in the direction of competition-based
hypotheses. The specific role of indefinite arti-
cles triggering these ambiguities over word order
points once again to a complex interaction at the
interface between syntax, semantics, and pragmat-
ics. We also demonstrated the experimental value
of free(r) word order languages with case marking.

Our cloze task illustrates an aspect of the role
of syntactic variation in quantifier interpretation.
In order to investigate its specific time course, the
most immediate future work is to take our stimuli
to other experimental modalities, including self-
paced reading and eyetracking.

In the longer run, we plan to use corpus (Say-
eed, 2017) and machine learning investigations to
determine the empirical basis of plurality judge-
ments in ambiguously scoped events.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by funding from the Ger-
man Research Foundation (DFG) for the Clus-
ter of Excellence “Multimodal Computing and In-
teraction” (EXC 284) and from the Swedish Re-
search Council (VR) for the Center for Linguistic
Theory and Studies in Probability (2014-39).

References
Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve

Walker. 2014. Fitting linear mixed-effects models
using lme4. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5823.

Veena D Dwivedi. 2013. Interpreting quantifier scope
ambiguity: Evidence of heuristic first, algorithmic
second processing. PloS one, 8(11):e81461.

Ruth Filik, Kevin B. Paterson, and Simon P. Liv-
ersedge. 2004. Processing doubly quantified sen-
tences: Evidence from eye movements. Psycho-
nomic Bulletin & Review, 11(5):953–959.



139

Janet Dean Fodor. 1982. The mental representation
of quantifiers. In Processes, beliefs, and questions,
pages 129–164. Springer.

Michael Friendly, Georges Monette, and John Fox.
2013. Elliptical insights: Understanding statistical
methods through elliptical geometry. Statist. Sci.,
28(1):1–39.

James J. Gibson. 1977. The theory of affordances. In
John Bransford Robert E Shaw, editor, Perceiving,
acting, and knowing: toward an ecological psychol-
ogy, pages pp.67–82. Hillsdale, N.J. : Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates.

Georgette Ioup. 1975. Some universals for quantifier
scope. Syntax and semantics, 4:37–58.

Alexander Koller, Stefan Thater, and Manfred Pinkal.
2010. Scope underspecification with tree descrip-
tions: Theory and practice. In Matthew W. Crocker
and Jrg Siekmann, editors, Resource-Adaptive Cog-
nitive Processes, Cognitive Technologies, pages
337–364. Springer.

Howard S Kurtzman and Maryellen C MacDonald.
1993. Resolution of quantifier scope ambiguities.
Cognition, 48(3):243–279.

Florian Pusse, Asad Sayeed, and Vera Demberg. 2016.
Lingoturk: managing crowdsourced tasks for psy-
cholinguistics. In Proceedings of the 2016 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Demonstra-
tions, pages 57–61, San Diego, California. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Janina Radó and Oliver Bott. 2018. What do speaker
judgments tell us about theories of quantifier scope
in German? Glossa: a journal of general linguis-
tics, 3(1).

EG Ruys and Yoad Winter. 2011. Quantifier scope in
formal linguistics. In Handbook of philosophical
logic, pages 159–225. Springer.

Asad Sayeed. 2017. Towards an annotation framework
for incremental scope specification update. In Pro-
ceedings of the conference on logic and machine
learning in natural language (LaML 2017), Gothen-
burg.


