



















































Tagging modality in Oceanic languages of Melanesia


Proceedings of the 13th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 65–70
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

65

Tagging modality in Oceanic languages of Melanesia

Annika Tjuka
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin

tjukanni@hu-berlin.de

Lena Weißmann
Freie Universität Berlin

lena.weissmann@fu-berlin.de

Kilu von Prince
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
kilu.von.prince@hu-berlin.de

Abstract

Primary data from small, low-resource lan-
guages of Oceania have only recently be-
come available through language documenta-
tion. In our study, we explore corpus data
of five Oceanic languages of Melanesia which
are known to be mood-prominent (in the sense
of Bhat, 1999). In order to find out more
about tense, aspect, modality, and polarity, we
tagged these categories in a subset of our cor-
pora. For the category of modality, we de-
veloped a novel tag set (MelaTAMP, 2017),
which categorizes clauses into factual, possi-
ble, and counterfactual. Based on an analy-
sis of the inter-annotator consistency, we ar-
gue that our tag set for the modal domain is
efficient for our subject languages and might
be useful for other languages and purposes.

1 Introduction

Our understanding of the Oceanic languages of
Melanesia has so far been based mostly on de-
scriptive accounts rather than primary data, since
no documentation existed until recently. For some
of these languages, high-quality corpora have now
become available, but their exploration is still in
its infancy.

In our MelaTAMP research project, we carry
out a comparative, corpus-based study on tense,
aspect, and modality (TAM) categories in seven
Oceanic languages: Daakaka, Dalkalaen, Daakie,
Mavea, Nafsan, Saliba-Logea, North Ambrym (cf.
MelaTAMP, 2017). Speaker populations range
from about 30 (Mavea) to around 6000 (Nafsan).
TAM-related meanings are often expressed obli-
gatorily within the verbal complex, sometimes in
more than one place. Thus, Mavea has three pre-
verbal slots for expressing TAM values; in ad-
dition, some subject-agreement markers also ex-
press the difference between realis and irrealis
modalities and reduplication can be used to ex-
press pluractionality (see Table 1). By contrast,

Saliba-Logea only uses optional particles to ex-
press TAM-related meanings.

In this paper, we discuss our tag set and its ap-
plication in a subset of texts in the corpora of five
languages: Daakaka, Dalkalaen, Mavea, Nafsan,
and Saliba-Logea. The focus of our paper is on
the process of tagging modality.

Previous studies which tag modality in corpora
have focused on differentiating between modal
flavours such as deontic and epistemic, and modal
forces such as necessity and possibility. Thus, the
sentence in (1-a) expresses an epistemic possibil-
ity while (1-b) conveys a deontic necessity.

(1) a. Naomi might be a surgeon.
b. Martha must hand in her assignment to-

morrow.

These distinctions are notoriously difficult to tag,
with coarse-grained ontologies yielding better re-
sults than more fine-grained ones (Rubinstein
et al., 2013). Most approaches focus on modal
auxiliaries such as must, and modal adverbs such
as probably (Cui and Chi, 2013; Quaresma et al.,
2014).

In the languages of our project, however, modal
auxiliaries and adverbs are rare, and do not play
the same role in expressing modality as they do in
many European languages. Instead, verb moods,
such as realis and irrealis, are largely responsi-
ble for the modal interpretation of a clause. These
expressions are usually under-specified for modal
force and flavour. Instead of modal forces and
flavours, we therefore differentiate three modal
categories based on a branching-times framework
(von Prince, 2019), which is explained in section
3.2.

The ontology of our modal tag set was primarily
motivated by theoretical concerns and preliminary
experiences with the driving factors in Oceanic
TAM systems. The targets of our tags were indi-
vidual clauses, regardless of the presence of spe-



66

SBJ.AGR COND NEG IT/INCPT NUM IMPF REDUP- Verb ADV TR OBJ
i-, . . . mo- sopo- me-/pete- r-/tol- l(o)- =i =a/NP

Table 1: The verbal complex in Mavea (Guérin, 2011).

cific modality-related expressions. Their TAM
values were tagged according to their temporal-
modal reference, irrespective of the presence of
specific TAM markers (e. g., in Emma wants [to
eat ice cream], the infinitive complement clause
would be tagged to refer to the (relative) possible
future).

The analysis of inter-annotator consistency in
the tagging process shows that our modal cate-
gories are reasonably easy to assign based on the
translations into English. This suggests that the
same ontology might be useful for other purposes
and languages as well.

2 Data

The data of our study consists of a series of nar-
rative and explanatory texts in corpora of five
Oceanic languages. These corpora are the result
of language documentation and are richly anno-
tated, with morpheme-by-morpheme glosses, part-
of-speech tags, translations into English, as well
as metadata on speakers, text genre, and the cir-
cumstances of the recording. In addition, we en-
riched parts of the corpora with our own tag set for
TAM values. For optimal facilities for searching
and analysis, we imported all corpora to the AN-
NIS platform (Krause and Zeldes, 2016). We used
Druskat (2018) to import them from their native
SIL Toolbox format.

The corpora of the MelaTAMP project are held
and versioned in a git repository (MelaTAMP,
2017). The repository itself is private and cur-
rently only accessible by members of the project
team. Published versions of each corpus are avail-
able from various archives: von Prince (2013a,b);
Krifka (2013); Guérin (2006); Thieberger (2006);
Franjieh (2013); Margetts et al. (2017).

3 The Tag Set

3.1 Overview

In an initial stage of exploration, we identified
comparable texts across the corpora (see Table 2).
Each of the selected 26 texts was segmented into
annotation units, which often correspond to a sin-
gle sentence. These units were further segmented

into clause-based subdivisions for TAM annota-
tion (1953 clauses in total). Each clause was an-
notated for clause type, temporal reference, modal
reference, aspect, and polarity. Our tag set which
consisted of five categories with 21 tags is dis-
played in Table 3. Compared to some previous
approaches, our ontology of clause types is richer
than, e. g., Leech and Weisser (2003), but far
less fine-grained than Twitchell and Nunamaker
(2004); our tag set for tense is less fine-grained
than, e. g., Zymla (2017). These differences are
mostly due to different goals and data. We con-
centrated on those categories that were most likely
to determine differential TAM marking in our sub-
ject languages. The tag set for clauses should be
applicable for similar purposes to other languages.
The tag sets for temporal and aspectual reference
would have to be more fine-grained to accommo-
date graded tense systems, highly differentiated
aspect systems, and similar.

3.2 The Modal Tag Set

We found that, for our subject languages, the dis-
tinction which is most useful and basic to the TAM
systems is the distinction between realis and ir-
realis, as is often the case in Oceanic (compare
Lichtenberk, 2016). At the same time, irrealis is a
very large modal domain that is often subdivided
by more specific markers. This can be modeled by
the approach of von Prince (2019), which shows
that a branching-times framework can be used to
generate three different modal domains: the possi-
ble (future), the actual (past and present), and the
counterfactual (past, present and future). This dif-
fers crucially from previous approaches to modal-
ity which were based on a binary distinction, with-
out the option to exclusively quantify over coun-
terfactual indices. It is this theoretical innovation
which allows for a tag set that is more informa-
tive than a mere realis/irrealis distinction, without
relying on the often elusive distinctions between
modal flavors.

Given the assumptions in von Prince (2019), the
three domains are defined as follows:

• The actual present i0 and the actual past (pre-
decessors of i0).



67

Language #Texts #Tokens #Texts taggged #Clauses taggged
Daakaka 119 68k 5 143
Dalkalaen 114 34k 6 724
Mavea 61 45k 3 639
Nafsan 110 65k 6 364
Saliba-Logea 214 150k* 6 159
Total 618 362k 26 2029

Table 2: Corpora included in this study; *of the 150k tokens in this corpus, about 70k are fully annotated.

Category Name Tags
Clause type clause assertion, question, directive; embedded: proposition, conditional,

e.question, temporal, adverbial, attributive
Temporal domain time past, future, present
Modal domain mood factual, counterfactual, possible
Aspectual domain event bounded, ongoing, repeated, stative
Polarity polarity positive, negative

Table 3: Tag set of the MelaTAMP project (MelaTAMP, 2017).

• The counterfactual past, present, and future:
indices that are neither predecessors nor suc-
cessors of i0.

• The possible future(s): successors of i0.
Figure 1 illustrates the three domains of modal-

ity.

Figure 1: The three domains of the factual (solid line),
the counterfactual (dotted lines), and the possible fu-
ture (dashed lines). Vertically aligned indices are here
taken to be simultaneous.

For the purposes of our tag set, we make
a three-way distinction which builds on those
domains, but is not entirely identical to them.
The three values that we use are factual,
counterfactual, and possible: the tags
factual (it rained) and counterfactual
(she should have run faster, winning would have
been hard) coincide with the corresponding do-
mains. The tag possible comprises several do-
mains, depending on the temporal reference of the

clause: the possible future (it will rain) and quan-
tification over both the actual and the counterfac-
tual domain (it may have rained).

Tagging was mainly based on the English trans-
lations of the texts although in some cases, the
glosses were considered as well, when translations
were unclear. Each clause was tagged manually
by two annotators: Annika Tjuka and Lena Weiß-
mann. There were no discontinuous clauses. The
sentence in (2) was tagged as follows:

(2) tenem
that.DIST

iya
3SG

Gesila
Place.Name

stoli-na
story-3SG.POSS

“that’s the story of Gesila” (Saliba-Logea:
Gesila 01BC 0265)

• clause: assertion
• time: present
• mood: factual
• event: stative
• polarity: positive

After a text was tagged by the two annotators in-
dependently, the tags of both versions were com-
pared by one of the annotators and the inconsis-
tencies were noted in a table and discussed. If
the decision for either one of the tags was clear,
the correct tag was inserted in the final document.
Many early sources of disagreement were clari-
fied by guidelines in the documentation of the tag
set (MelaTAMP, 2017). In doubtful cases, the
tags were discussed with the principal investiga-



68

tor of the project: Kilu von Prince. The inter-
annotator agreement was calculated on the basis
of the inconsistencies in each tag which were de-
tected through the initial comparison.

In addition to corpus work, we and our collab-
orators also carried out field work in Vanuatu to
elicit modal-temporal contexts that were rarely at-
tested in the corpora. We report on this work in
von Prince et al. (2018).

4 Analysis of Inter-Annotator
Consistency

A total number of 9765 tags in 1953 clauses (five
tags per clause) were assigned by the two anno-
tators. In 817 tags, inconsistencies between the
annotation of the annotators were present. Figure
2 illustrates the inter-annotator consistency and in-
consistency in each category of the tag set.

Figure 2: Percentages of inter-annotator consistencies
(light) and inconsistencies (dark) in each TAM cate-
gory of the tag set.

The graph shows that the percentages of in-
consistencies between the categories differ. Mis-
matches are especially prone to arise in the event
category. This category has the lowest inter-
annotator agreement with α = 0.79.1 In contrast,
the polarity category had the lowest inconsistency
percentage with 0.82%. The α score in this cate-
gory is α = 0.91.

The analysis of each tag in the mood category
reveals differences between the percentage of in-
consistencies, as illustrated in Figure 3.

The 12.7% of the inter-annotator inconsistency
in the possible tag is based on 496 clauses
which are tagged as possible. Most of these
inconsistencies result from mismatches in tagging

1The Krippendorff’s alpha coefficient measures the sta-
tistical agreement between two annotators (Krippendorff,
1980).

Figure 3: Percentages of inter-annotator consistencies
(light) and inconsistencies (dark) in each tag of the
mood category.

temporal sentences, see (3). Thus, in the follow-
ing example, it is hard to tell whether the sentence
implies that the agents did reach their destination
or whether it only implies that they were headed
there:

(3) . . . panpan
until

na
PURP

ra=pak
3D.RS=to

nagis
point

“[they went] until they got to the [next]
point” (Nafsan: 036.017)

Among the small number of clauses which had the
counterfactual tag (37 clauses), there were
8.11% inconsistencies. In general, counterfactual
sentences are rare and are not easy to detect. A
prominent context for counterfactual modality is
false-belief-reports (compare Van Linden and Ver-
straete, 2008), as the embedded clause in example
(4); or conditional clauses referring to situations
in the past that did not occur, as the two clauses in
example (5).

(4) ru=mroki
3PL.RS=think

[na
COMP

ruk=fan
3PL.IR=go

sol
get

tete
some

mane
money

emrom
inside

st]o.
shop

“they thought [someone had taken money
from inside the shop].” (Nafsan: 030.048)

(5) [taba
IRR

lahi
yesterday

ya
1SG.SBJ

mwamwayauma]
quick-to.SP

[kabo
then

ya
1SG.SBJ

kai]
eat

“If I had hurriedly come here yester-
day then I would have eaten.” (Saliba:
Boneyawa 05BC 0020)

The factual tag is the most consistent tag in
the mood category with 3.17% inconsistencies in
1481 clauses. The tag is based on the factual do-



69

main of the branching-times framework and was
assigned to clauses expressing the actual present
and past, as in (6).

(6) mwe
REAL

liye
take

an
3S.POSS

bosi
copra.chisel

“He took his copra chisel.” (Daakaka: 0139)

The evaluation of the mood category results in an
α score of α = 0.85 which can be considered ac-
ceptable (cf. Carletta, 1996). This result reveals
how efficient the tag set in this category seems to
be.

5 Discussion

In this paper, we explored the tagging of TAM cat-
egories in corpora of five Oceanic languages with
a focus on the modal domain. Selected texts were
divided into clause-based annotation units which
were then tagged by two annotators based on the
previously established tag set. The two versions of
the tagged texts were then compared manually in
order to identify and resolve mismatches in certain
cases. The results of the inter-annotator consis-
tency show that our tag set works especially well
in the mood category.

In comparison to more fine-grained distinc-
tions, e.g., as proposed in Rubinstein et al. (2013),
the differentiation between the tags factual,
counterfactual, and possible seems to
be less prone to inter-annotator inconsistencies.
Their basic score of α = 0.49 in the Modality
Type (Rubinstein et al., 2013) was much lower
than our overall result (α = 0.85). Only when
they collapsed priority types (i.e., bouletic, tele-
ological, bouletic/teleological, deontic, and prior-
ity) and non-priority types (i.e., epistemic, circum-
stantial, ability, epistemic/circumstantial, abil-
ity/circumstantial), they achieved an α score of
0.89. This indicates that the distinction in more
than three levels results in an unreliable annotation
compared to a coarse-grained approach.

Our methodology also differs from previous ap-
proaches to tagging modality in that we did not
identify a specific target set of expressions to la-
bel – such as modal auxiliaries and adverbs – but
tagged all clauses within a selected set of texts.
We believe that this approach is particularly useful
for languages that rely more on verb moods such
as irrealis and subjunctive, as opposed to lexical
expressions such as auxiliaries, for the expression

of modality. Depending on the languages and the
goals of tagging modality, our tag set may there-
fore be an interesting alternative to other models.

6 Conclusion

We presented a novel approach for tagging the
modal domain in mood-prominent languages (cf.
Bhat, 1999) which contributes to a more stable
inter-annotator consistency. The overall tag set
that we used to annotate the TAM categories ex-
hibits a high percentage of inter-annotator consis-
tency throughout different categories. In addition,
our modal tag set has been proven useful for our
purposes and provides an alternative to previous
distinctions based on modal flavours.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank three anonymous review-
ers for their valuable feedback and suggestions.
And we would like to thank the DFG (German
Research Foundation) for funding this research
(MelaTAMP project, 273640553).

References
D. N. S. Bhat. 1999. The Prominence of Tense, Aspects,

and Mood. John Benjamins.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational lin-
guistics, 22(2):249–254.

Xiaomeng Cui and Ting Chi. 2013. Annotating Modal
Expressions in the Chinese Treebank Yanyan.

Stephan Druskat. 2018. ToolboxTextModules (Version
1.1.0).

Michael Franjieh. 2013. A documentation of North
Ambrym, a language of Vanuatu. SOAS, ELAR.,
London.

Valérie Guérin. 2006. Documentation of Mavea.
SOAS, ELAR, London.

Valérie Guérin. 2011. A grammar of Mav̋ea: An
Oceanic language of Vanuatu. University of
Hawai’i Press, Honolulu.

Thomas Krause and Amir Zeldes. 2016. ANNIS3: A
new architecture for generic corpus query and vi-
sualization. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities,
31(1):118–139.

Manfred Krifka. 2013. Daakie, The Language Archive.
MPI for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen.

Klaus Krippendorff. 1980. Content analysis: An intro-
duction to its methodology. Sage publications.

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1162207
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1162207


70

Geoffrey Leech and Martin Weisser. 2003. Generic
speech act annotation for task-oriented dialogues. In
Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2003 confer-
ence, volume 16, Lancaster. Lancaster University.

Frantisek Lichtenberk. 2016. Modality and Mood in
Oceanic. In Jan Nuyts and Johan van der Auwera,
editors, The Oxford Handbook of Mood and Modal-
ity, chapter 14, pages 330–361. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

An Van Linden and Jean-Christophe Verstraete. 2008.
The nature and origins of counterfactuality in sim-
ple clauses: Cross-linguistic evidence. Journal of
Pragmatics, 40:1865–1895.

Anna Margetts, Andrew Margetts, and Carmen
Dawuda. 2017. Saliba/Logea, The Language
Archive. MPI for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen.

MelaTAMP. 2017. Primary data repository –
MelaTAMP. https://wikis.hu-berlin.
de/melatamp.

Kilu von Prince. 2019. Counterfactuality and past.
Linguistics and Philosophy.

Kilu von Prince. 2013a. Daakaka, The Language
Archive. MPI for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen.

Kilu von Prince. 2013b. Dalkalaen, The Language
Archive. MPI for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen.

Kilu von Prince, Ana Krajinović, Manfred Krifka,
Valérie Guérin, and Michael Franjieh. 2018. Map-
ping Irreality: Storyboards for Eliciting TAM con-
texts. In Proceedings of Linguistic Evidence 2018.

Paulo Quaresma, Amália Mendes, Iris Hendrickx,
and Teresa Gonçalves. 2014. Tagging and La-
belling Portuguese Modal Verbs. In J. Baptista,
N. Mamede, S. Candeias, I. Paraboni, T.A.S. Pardo,
and M.G. Volpe Nunes, editors, Computational Pro-
cessing of the Portuguese Language, volume 8775
of PROPOR 2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, pages 70–81. Springer, Cham.

Aynat Rubinstein, Hillary Harner, Elizabeth Krawczyk,
Daniel Simonson, Graham Katz, and Paul Portner.
2013. Toward fine-grained annotation of modality in
text. In Proceedings of IWCS 10, WAMM, Potsdam.

Nick Thieberger. 2006. Dictionary and texts in South
Efate. Digital collection managed by PARADISEC.

Douglas P. Twitchell and Jay F. Nunamaker. 2004.
Speech act profiling: A probabilistic method for
analyzing persistent conversations and their partici-
pants. In 37th Annual Hawaii International Confer-
ence on System Sciences, 2004. Proceedings of the,
volume 37, pages 1713–1722.

Mark-Matthias Zymla. 2017. Comprehensive anno-
tation of cross-linguistic variation in tense and as-
pect categories. In 12th International Conference
on Computational Semantics.

https://wikis.hu-berlin.de/melatamp
https://wikis.hu-berlin.de/melatamp
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10988-019-09259-6
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09761-9_7
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09761-9_7

