
























































STAC_Science_Toolkit_Based_on_Chinese_Idiom_Knowledge_Graph.pdf


Proceedings of the Workshop on Extracting Structured Knowledge from Scientific Publications, pages 57–61
Minneapolis, USA, June 6, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

57

STAC: Science Toolkit Based on Chinese Idiom Knowledge Graph

Meiling Wang1, Min Xiao2, Changliang Li1∗, Yu Guo1, Zhixin Zhao1 and Xiaonan Liu1
1AI Lab, KingSoft Corp, Beijing, China

2Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{wangmeiling1, lichangliang, guoyu9}@kingsoft.com

{zhaozhixin, liuxiaonan1}@kingsoft.com
xiaomincloud@gmail.com

Abstract

Chinese idioms (Cheng Yu) have seen five t-
housand years’ history and culture of China,
meanwhile they contain large number of sci-
entific achievement of ancient China. How-
ever, existing Chinese online idiom dictionar-
ies have limited function for scientific explo-
ration. In this paper, we first construct a
Chinese idiom knowledge graph by extracting
domains and dynasties and associating them
with idioms, and based on the idiom knowl-
edge graph, we propose a Science Toolkit for
Ancient China (STAC) aiming to support sci-
entific exploration. In the STAC toolkit, idiom
navigator helps users explore overall scientif-
ic progress from idiom perspective with visu-
alization tools, and idiom card and idiom QA
shorten action path and avoid thinking being
interrupted while users are reading and writ-
ing. The current STAC toolkit is deployed at
http://120.92.208.22:7476/demo/#/stac.

1 Introduction

Large scientific wealth has been accumulated dur-
ing five thousand years’ history of ancient China,
and much knowledge passed down from ancients
is still valuable for modern people, therefore lots
of researchers are exploring ancient Chinese sci-
ence and technology (Jia et al., 2004; Zhu et al.,
1998b,a) continuously.

Chinese idioms (Cheng Yu) have seen the his-
tory and culture of China, meanwhile they contain
large number of scientific achievement of ancien-
t China (Dai, 2003). For the example in Table 1,
“ ” (One inch of time, one inch of
gold) mentions time measurement technique using
sundial of ancient Astronomy domain in Han dy-
nasty ( ). Therefore, Chinese idioms are re-
garded as an important source of ancient scien-
tific achievement information. However, existing
Chinese online idiom dictionaries, such as Baidu

Chinese Channel1, Han dictionary2 and Cihai on-
line dictionaries3, have limited function for sci-
entific exploration. Those online idiom dictionar-
ies mainly store basic information of idioms, e.g.,
pronunciation, explanation, source, synonyms and
antonyms, and they can be leveraged to search id-
ioms by names or keywords and to get basic infor-
mation of idioms, but it is difficult for researchers
to get idioms by domain and dynasty information,
and it is also impossible to obtain the trend of sci-
entific progress from idiom perspective.

In this paper, we propose a Science Toolkit for
Ancient China (STAC) based on a Chinese idiom
knowledge graph aiming to support scientific ex-
ploration. We first extract domains and dynasties
from explanation and source of idioms, and then
associate domains and dynasties with idioms to
construct the idiom knowledge graph. Based on
the knowledge graph, we design and implement
idiom navigator, idiom card and idiom QA of S-
TAC toolkit. Idiom navigator provides a visual p-
resentation for relations among idioms, dynasties
and domains, reflecting overall scientific progress
from idiom perspective, and idiom card gives ba-
sic information of idioms contained in users’ text,
such as dynasty, domain, explanation and source,
and idiom QA answers idioms to questions about
dynasties and domains, such as “

” (The idioms on Astronomy domain in Song
dynasty). Both idiom card and idiom QA are de-
signed for scenarios of text reading and writing to
shorten the path of users’ actions and avoid users’
thinking being interrupted.

2 Dataset

We mainly collect idiom data from Han dictionary
and Baidu Chinese Channel, and Han dictionary

1https://dict.baidu.com/
2www.zdic.net
3For example, http://www.cihai123.com/



58

Name (One inch of time, one inch of gold)

Explanation

“ ”
(One inch of time is as expensive

as one inch of gold, where “one inch of time” refers to time taking by shadow
of gnomon to move one inch distance on sundial plate.)

Source (“Huai Nan Zi” of Liu An)
Domain (Astronomy)
Dynasty (Han dynasty)

Table 1: An example of Chinese idioms.

is the most reliable and Baidu Chinese is much
more comprehensive. Firstly, we get 31,605 id-
ioms from Han dictionary and 30,923 idioms from
Baidu Chinese Channel respectively, and proper-
ties of these idioms include pronunciation, expla-
nation and source. Then we merge the two idiom
sets by setting Han dictionary prior to Baidu dic-
tionary for the duplicate idioms. The final dataset
is stored in MySQL database, containing 31,632
idioms, whose average number of characters in ex-
planation is 24 and average number of characters
in source is 32.

3 Idiom Knowledge Graph (IKG)
Construction

We construct an idiom knowledge graph based on
the dataset collected in Section 2. Hereinafter the
idiom knowledge graph is referred to as IKG. The
ontology definition of IKG contains:

(1) three types of entities, which are idiom enti-
ty denoted as IDIOM , dynasty entity denoted
as DYNASTY , and domain entity denoted as
DOMAIN ;

(2) three types of properties, which are expla-
nation of idiom denoted as explanation of ,
source of idiom denoted as source of ,
and pronunciation of idiom denoted as
pronunciation of ;

(3) two types of relations, which are relation
between dynasties and idioms denoted as
dynasty of , and relation between domains
and idioms denoted as domain of .

Instances of IDIOM are selected from 31,632
idioms of the dataset in relation extraction process,
and instances of explanation of , source of and
pronunciation of are queried directly from the
dataset. There are 14 DYNASTY instances, which

are defined according to the main dynasties of
ancient Chinese history, such as “ ” (War-
ring), “ ” (Han) and “ ” (Song), and there are
11 DOMAIN instances, which almost cover al-
l the domains in ancient China, such as “ ”
(Astronomy), “ ”(Handicraft) and “ ”
(Medicine).

The relation extraction process of domain of
and dynasty of is divided into following steps as
shown in Figure 1:

(1) For each idiom in the dataset, concat its ex-
planation string and source string and tokenize
the result string into a word bag with jieba
tool4, and then for each word in the word bag,
add its hypernym and hyponym words from
semantic dictionaries (e.g., HowNet5) into the
word bag, until the word bag is no longer
changing in its size, and the result word bag
is used as a feature of the idiom.

(2) Load a Chinese word vectors corpus pre-
trained on Chinese Wikipedia and Baidu En-
cyclopedia (Li et al., 2018), and then embed-
dings of 31,632 idioms, 14 DYNASTY in-
stances and 11 DOMAIN instances can be
looked up from it.

(3) Compute correlation based on WMD (Word
Mover’s Distance) algorithm (Kusner et al.,
2015) that can achieve better results for short
texts, and confirm final relations by human re-
viewers:

• for each DOMAIN instance, compute its
correlation with all the idioms, and send
top 100 idioms for human review to con-
firm final instances of domain of rela-
tion;

4https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba
5http://www.keenage.com/zhiwang/c zhiwang.html



59

Relations of
domain_of

and
dynasty_of

Concat
and

Tokenize

Explanation
and source

Add
hypernym

and
hyponym
words

Compute
correlation

and
execute
Human
review

Word bags of
idioms

Domains

Dynasties
Embeddings

of
idoms,
domains,
and

dynasties

Chinese
word
vector
corpr us

Chinese
word
vector
corpus

Figure 1: Relation extraction framework of IKG.

• for each idiom, compute its correlation
with all the DYNASTY instances and
send top 3 DYNASTY entities for hu-
man review to confirm final instances of
dynasty of relation, and human review-
ers could make decision with information
of books and authors contained in source
text, e.g., “Huai Nan Zi” ( )
and “Liu An” ( ) in Table 1.

Finally, 542 instances of domain of relation are
extracted and 532 IDIOM instances are selected
from the 31,632 idioms, and for the 532IDIOM in-
stances, 541 instances of dynasty of relation are
extracted. The whole knowledge graph is stored in
Neo4j6 graph database.

Figure 2 describes some statistics about IKG.
From Figure 2(a), we can see that the scientif-
ic progress in “ ” (Warring), “ ” (Han) and
“ ” (Song) is more significant than in other dy-
nasties, and from Figure 2(b), we can see that the
scientific progress in “ ” (Medicine), “
”(Handicraft) and “ ” (Physics) is more signif-
icant than in other domains.

4 STAC Toolkit

Based on IKG, we design and implement STAC
toolkit for scientific exploration of ancient China,
and the toolkit contains functions of idiom naviga-
tor, idiom card and idiom QA.

4.1 Idiom navigator
Idiom navigator is an idiom visualization tool, and
it gets all the idioms, dynasties and domains from
IKG and organizes them in tree structures based
on the relations contained in IKG. With idiom nav-
igator, users can browse idioms starting from dy-
nasties or domains. For example, after selecting
each dynasty, users can get expanded all the do-
mains that were developed in the dynasty, and af-

6https://neo4j.com/

(a) Distribution of IDIOM instances across DYNASTY
instances.

(b) Distribution of IDIOM instances across
DOMAIN instances.

Figure 2: Distribution of IDIOM instances across
DYNASTY instances and DOMAIN instances.

ter selecting one of these domains, they can also
get expanded all the idioms related with both the
domain and the dynasty. Then users could gain in-
formation on scientific progress level from idiom
perspective.

4.2 Idiom card

Idiom card provides basic information for the id-
ioms contained in users’ text, and users do not
need to switch to online idiom dictionaries, there-
fore the action path to get information of idioms is
shortened and users’ thinking is not interrupted.

Given a piece of text, we first extract all the id-
ioms from the text by multi-pattern matching al-
gorithm (e.g., Aho-Corasick string match algorith-
m (Aho and Corasick, 1975)), and then for each
idiom extracted, we query its dynasty, domain, ex-
planation, source and pronunciation from IKG. In
detail, domain and dynasty are queried by relation-
s, and explanation, source and pronunciation are
queried by properties. Finally, queried results for
all the idioms are presented to users.



60

Figure 3: Snapshot of STAC toolkit landing page.

4.3 Idiom QA
For questions about dynasties and domains, idiom
QA gives corresponding accurate idioms as an-
swer.

Given a question, we first extract all the dy-
nasties and domains from the question by multi-
pattern matching algorithm, and then we construc-
t a query statement using the extracted dynasties
and domains and execute the statement on IKG to
get idioms. In detail, the query statement is con-
structed as “select all the idioms that are associ-
ated with all the dynasties and domains”. Finally,
queried idioms are presented to users.

4.4 Deployment
STAC toolkit is developed using Django7 we-
b framework as backend, Neo4j as graph
database and Vue.js JavaScript library8 for fron-
tend page rendering, and we implement visu-
alization of idiom navigator with Zoomchart-
s.js library9. STAC toolkit is currently accessi-
ble at http://120.92.208.22:7476/demo/#/stac with
Google Chrome browser (Please note that the first
visit may take about 60 seconds). Figure 3 shows
a snapshot of STAC toolkit landing page.

We are continuously improving STAC toolkit,
and currently, users can use it in the following
way:

(1) Call out idiom navigator visualization tool
by clicking button “Domains” or “Dynasties”,
and double-click nodes of type DOMAIN
or DYNASTY to expand related nodes until
reaching end. Please note that some nodes of
DOMAIN or DYNASTY cannot be expanded
because there are no related nodes under them.

7https://www.djangoproject.com/
8https://vuejs.org/
9https://zoomcharts.com/

(2) Input some text into the left “Input” area, and
get card for idioms contained in text by click-
ing button “Card”. For example, input “ ‘

’ ...” (From the idiom “One
inch of time, one inch of gold” we can see
that...) and the idiom card of “

” is displayed in the right “Idiom” area,
containing its dynasty, domain, explanation,
source and pronunciation.

(3) Call out QA dialog box by clicking button
“QA”, and then enter some question about dy-
nasties and domains (e.g., the question exam-
ple in Section 1), and finally click “OK” but-
ton to get idioms as answer. Meanwhile id-
ioms in answer could be inserted into text by
clicking button “Insert”. Please note that dy-
nasties and domains in questions are assumed
to be correct, and similar words are not sup-
ported for questions.

(4) Call out glossary window by clicking button
“Glossary”, and then read the Chinese-English
glossary of dynasties and domains.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we first construct a Chinese idiom
knowledge graph and then propose STAC toolkit
that contains functions of idiom navigator, idiom
card and idiom QA for scientific exploration. Cur-
rently, idiom navigator helps users explore overall
scientific progress from idiom perspective, and id-
iom card and idiom QA shorten action path and
avoid thinking being interrupted while users are
reading and writing. In future, we plan to improve
idiom QA by context understanding and conduc-
t more evaluations on the idiom knowledge graph
and STAC.



61

References
Alfred V Aho and Margaret J Corasick. 1975. Effi-

cient string matching: an aid to bibliographic search.
Communications of the ACM, 18(6):333–340.

Wusan Dai. 2003. Ancient Technology in Idioms. Bai-
hua Literature and Art Publishing House, Tijin, Chi-
na.

Wei Jia, Wenyuan Gao, Yongqing Yan, Jie Wang,
Zhaohui Xu, Wenjie Zheng, and Peigen Xiao. 2004.
The rediscovery of ancient chinese herbal formu-
las. Phytotherapy Research: An International
Journal Devoted to Pharmacological and Toxico-
logical Evaluation of Natural Product Derivatives,
18(8):681–686.

Matt Kusner, Yu Sun, Nicholas Kolkin, and Kilian
Weinberger. 2015. From word embeddings to docu-
ment distances. In Proceedings of the 32nd Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, pages 957–
966.

Shen Li, Zhe Zhao, Renfen Hu, Wensi Li, Tao Liu, and
Xiaoyong Du. 2018. Analogical reasoning on chi-
nese morphological and semantic relations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers), pages 138–143. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Jiashi Zhu, Georges M Halpern, and Kenneth Jones.
1998a. The scientific rediscovery of a precious an-
cient chinese herbal regimen: Cordyceps sinensis
part ii. The Journal of Alternative and Complemen-
tary Medicine, 4(4):429–457.

Jiashi Zhu, Georges M Halpern, and Kenneth Jones.
1998b. The scientific rediscovery of an ancien-
t chinese herbal medicine: Cordyceps sinensis part
i. The Journal of alternative and complementary
medicine, 4(3):289–303.


