



















































Nuclearity in RST and signals of coherence relations


Proceedings of Discourse Relation Parsing and Treebanking (DISRPT2019), pages 30–37
Minneapolis, MN, June 6, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

30

Nuclearity in RST and signals of coherence relations

Debopam Das
Department of English and American Studies

Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany
dasdebop@hu-berlin.de

Abstract

We investigate the relationship between the
notion of nuclearity as proposed in Rhetorical
Structure Theory (RST) and the signalling of
coherence relations. RST relations are cate-
gorized as either mononuclear (comprising a
nucleus and a satellite span) or multinuclear
(comprising two or more nuclei spans). We
examine how mononuclear relations (e.g., An-
tithesis, Condition) and multinuclear relations
(e.g., Contrast, List) are indicated by relational
signals, more particularly by discourse mark-
ers (e.g., because, however, if, therefore). We
conduct a corpus study, examining the distri-
bution of either type of relations in the RST
Discourse Treebank (Carlson et al., 2002) and
the distribution of discourse markers for those
relations in the RST Signalling Corpus (Das
et al., 2015). Our results show that discourse
markers are used more often to signal multi-
nuclear relations than mononuclear relations.
The findings also suggest a complex relation-
ship between the relation types and syntactic
categories of discourse markers (subordinating
and coordinating conjunctions).

1 Introduction

Nuclearity in Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST)
is explained in terms of relative importance of text
spans (Mann and Thompson, 1988). The span per-
ceived (by the reader) to be more important or
central to the writer’s purpose is called the nu-
cleus, and the span perceived to be less impor-
tant or peripheral to the writer’s purpose is called
the satellite. RST relations having spans with
equal and unequal importance are known as mult-
inuclear and mononuclear relations, respectively.
Examples of multinuclear relations include Con-
trast, List or Sequence, and examples of mononu-
clear relations include Condition, Elaboration, Ev-
idence or Summary. The notion of nuclearity
in RST represents a symmetric-asymmetric di-

vide, which also parallels with the distinction be-
tween non-hierarchical and hierarchical relations:
Multinuclear relations are symmetrical or non-
hierarchical relations, and mononuclear relations
are asymmetric or hierarchical relations.

Coherence relations, whether multinuclear or
mononuclear, are often signalled by discourse
markers (henceforth DMs)1. For example, a Con-
trast relation (multinuclear) can be indicated by
the DM but, and an Evidence relation (mononu-
clear) can be conveyed through the DM because.
Research on the signalling phenomenon in dis-
course has, however, more recently shown that co-
herence relations can well be indicated by other
textual signals such as certain lexical expressions
or syntactic features, both in addition to or in the
absence of DMs (Das and Taboada, 2018). For
instance, in the Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB
3.0) (Webber et al., 2018, p. 10) the Condition re-
lation between the text segments (within square
brackets) in Example 1 is conveyed through the
use of auxiliary inversion (underlined)2:

(1) [. . . but would have climbed 0.6%,]
[had it not been for the storm] (file no: wsj-
0573)

In this paper, we investigate the relationship be-
tween the notion of nuclearity in RST and the
signalling of coherence relations. We examine
whether nuclearity has a role to play in relation
marking, and whether multinuclear and mononu-

1In this paper, we define discourse markers as having the
meaning of a two-place relation, and not representing ele-
ments like hedges, fillers or interjections, as in conversations.
While the term ‘discourse connectives’ is deemed to be more
appropriate, we prefer to use the term discourse markers in
the spirit of the RST Signalling Corpus (Das et al., 2015),
which we base our analyses on.

2In the PDTB 3.0, this is represented by a finer version
of AltLex, called AltLexC, which records the position of the
relevant lexico-grammatical signal within a sentence.



31

clear relations differ in terms of signalling. How-
ever, since a complete analysis of all kinds of re-
lational signals is beyond the scope of the present
paper, we constrain our analysis only to DMs, and
do not consider any other types of signalling3. We
address the following research questions:

1. How are mononuclear and multinuclear rela-
tions signalled in text?

2. Does one category employ more DMs than
the other?

3. What types of DMs (subordinating and co-
ordinating conjunctions) are used to indicate
these two categories of relations?

DMs, although primarily representing a func-
tional category, are generally considered to belong
to four different syntactic classes: coordinating
conjunction (like and and but, as when they con-
nect two coordinated clauses), subordinating con-
junction (like if and since, as when they connect
a subordinate adjunct clause to a main clause),
prepositional phrases (like in addition and as a re-
sult, as when they connect two main clauses or
sentences), and adverbial phrases (like however
and nevertheless, as used much like the above-
mentioned prepositional phrases). The question
that we aim to address here is to what degree these
canonical signal types correspond to the categories
of nuclearity in RST. More simply, we examine,
for example, to what extent coordinated conjunc-
tions are used to indicate multinuclear relations,
and to what extent subordinated conjunctions are
used to signal mononuclear relations. For this pur-
pose, we examine the signalling of mononuclear
and multinuclear relations in the RST Signalling
Corpus (Das et al., 2015), a corpus annotated for
relational signals, which is built upon the RST
Discourse Treebank (Carlson et al., 2002), a cor-
pus annotated for coherence relations.

The paper is organized as follows: In Section
2, we provide the distribution of mononuclear and
multinuclear relations in the RST Discourse Tree-
bank. Section 3 provides a brief introduction to
the RST Signalling Corpus, with a special focus
on DMs. In Section 4, we present the results, re-
porting on the distributions of mononuclear and
multinuclear relations with respect to DMs. Sec-
tion 5 reflects on the implications of the results,

3We believe that the signalling of relations beyond dis-
course markers constitutes an important topic, and is worthy
of investigation in its own right. We discuss the prospects of
conducting a similar analysis of other signals for nuclearity
in Section 5.

Project # rel # mono # multi # both
M&T4 23 21 2 0
PCC5 31 26 5 0
GUM6 20 16 3 1
Span TB7 28 22 6 0
DiZer8 32 26 6 0
Website9 25 21 4 0
RST-DT10 78 53 8 17

Table 1: Distribution of mononuclear and multinuclear
RST relations in RST-based studies

and outlines a few potential future developments
of this work. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the
paper, and provides the conclusion.

2 Nuclearity and RST-DT

In RST-based research, just like the way relational
inventories differ from studies to studies, so does
the number of mononuclear and multinuclear rela-
tions within an inventory, as shown in Table 1.

In this study, we examine the relations from
the RST Discourse Treebank (henceforth the RST-
DT) (Carlson et al., 2002). The corpus, as the dis-
tribution (in Table 1) shows, uses a large set of 78
relations, including 53 mononuclear and 8 multi-
nuclear relations. Most importantly, unlike other
RST-based projects (in Table 1) that only distin-
guish between mononuclear and multinuclear re-
lations (exception: the GUM corpus), the RST-DT
includes an additional category for relations that
can appear as both mononuclear or multinuclear11.
The taxonomy of the RST-DT relations in terms of
nuclearity is provided in Table 2.

The RST-DT contains a total of 20,123 rela-
tions, which were expanded to 21,400 relations
for the signalling annotation in the RST Signalling
Corpus (Das and Taboada, 2017), as a result of
complying with a strict binary branching require-
ment and thus breaking a multinuclear relation

4Mann and Thompson (1988)
5Potsdam Commentary Corpus (Stede, 2016)
6The GUM corpus (Zeldes, 2017)
7RST Spanish Treebank (da Cunha et al., 2011)
8DIscourse analyZER for Brazilian Portuguese (Maziero

et al., 2011)
9RST website (http://www.sfu.ca/rst/)

10RST Discourse Treebank (Carlson et al., 2002)
11The assignation of nuclearity status on a particular span

can sometimes be a matter of considerable difficulty, and the
inclusion of the both mono and multi versions of relations in
the RST-DT, as Stede (2008) suggests, provided the RST-DT
annotators greater freedom in choosing what spans should be
labeled nuclear.

http://www.sfu.ca/rst/


32

Type Relation
mono Antithesis, Attribution, Background,

Cause, Circumstance, Comment, Conces-
sion, Condition, Contingency, Definition,
Elaboration-additional, Elaboration-set-
member, Elaboration-part-whole, Elaboration-
process-step, Elaboration-object-attribute,
Elaboration-general-specific, Enablement, Ev-
idence, Example, Explanation-argumentative,
Hypothetical, Manner, Means, Otherwise,
Preference, Purpose, Restatement, Result,
Rhetorical-question, Summary, Temporal-after,
Temporal-before

multi Contrast, Cause-Result, Comment-topic, Dis-
junction, Inverted-sequence, List, Otherwise,
Proportion, Same-unit, Sequence, Textual-
organization, Topic-comment

both Analogy, Comparison, Conclusion, Conse-
quence, Evaluation, Interpretation, Problem-
solution, Question-answer, Reason, Statement-
response, Temporal-same-time, Topic-drift,
Topic-shift

Table 2: Relation types in RST-DT

having more than two nuclei into more than one
(multinuclear) relation. These 21,400 relations are
divided into 16,526 mononuclear and 4,874 mult-
inuclear relations.

3 RST Signalling Corpus

The RST Signalling Corpus (henceforth the RST-
SC) (Das et al., 2015) provides signalling anno-
tation for the coherence relations that are present
in the RST-DT. The RST-SC implements a wide
perspective of signalling, and provides annotation
for a large variety of textual signals, such as ref-
erence, lexical, semantic, syntactic, graphical and
genre-related features, in addition to DMs. These
signals are organized hierarchically in a taxonomy
of three levels: signal class, signal type, and spe-
cific signal. The top level, signal class, has three
tags representing three major classes of signals:
single, combined and unsure. For each class, a
second level is identified; for example, the class
single is divided into nine signal types (e.g., ref-
erence, syntactic, graphical). Finally, the third
level in the hierarchy refers to specific signals; for
example, reference type has four specific signals:
personal, demonstrative, comparative, and propo-
sitional reference. The hierarchical organization
of the taxonomy is provided in Figure 112.

The distribution of relations by signals in the
RST-SC (in Table 3, from Das and Taboada

12Note that subcategories in the figure are only illustrative,
not exhaustive. For the detailed taxonomy and definitions of
signals, see Das (2014).

Figure 1: Hierarchical taxonomy of signals in RST-SC

(2018)) shows that an overwhelming majority of
the relations in the RST-DT are signalled, and also
that the majority of signalled relations are indi-
cated by other signals rather than DMs. Only
3,896 (2,280 + 1,616) relations out of 21,400 re-
lations (18.21% of all relations) are indicated by
DMs13. These DMs are distributed across 201
different types, which can be further divided into
coordinating conjunctions, subordinating conjunc-
tions, prepositional and adverbial phrases.

In order to examine the relationship between
nuclearity and DMs, we extract from the RST-SC
(i) instances of all DMs, and (2) instances of dif-
ferent relations that are indicated by those DMs.
A complete analysis of the relationship between
the relations (78 types) and DMs (201 types) in
the RST-SC, however, could not be covered in
the present paper. That is why, we focus only
on the most frequently occurring DMs and most
frequently occurring relations in the corpus. In
order to extract those tokens, we use UAM Cor-
pusTool (O’Donnell, 2008), which was also used
to annotate the RST-SC. The tool provides an ef-
ficient tag-specific search option for finding re-
quired annotated segments, and it also provides
various types of statistical analyses of the corpus.

13One possible reason for the RST-SC for having a lower
proportion of DMs than other comparable corpora is that the
RST-SC employs a much stricter definition for DMs. For ex-
ample, the PDTB 3.0 corpus (Webber et al., 2018), containing
45.93% relations with explicit connectives, uses more flexi-
ble parameters in the connective definition, and includes very
frequently occurring words such as also, by, from, in or like as
connectives. In contrast, the RST-SC considers these expres-
sions not as DMs, but as lexical signals (more specifically,
indicative words).



33

Relation type Signalling type # %

Signalled relations

Relations exclusively signalled by DMs 2,280 10.65
Relations exclusively signalled by other signals 15,951 74.54
Relations signalled by both DMs and other signals 1,616 7.55

TOTAL 19,847 92.74
Unsignalled relations Relations not signalled by DMs or other signals 1,553 7.26

TOTAL 21,400 100.00

Table 3: Distribution of signalled and unsignalled relations in RST-SC

4 Results

We first examine how mononuclear and multinu-
clear relations are distributed in the RST-SC with
respect to signalling. The distribution in Table 4
shows that both mononuclear or multinuclear rela-
tions most often contain signals (over 90% of the
relations). This also shows, however, that when
it comes to the signalling by DMs, multinuclear
relations are more often indicated by DMs than
mononuclear relations: About 30% of the multinu-
clear relations contain a DM while only about 15%
of the mononuclear relations occur with them.

Next, we find in the RST-SC the relations that
are most frequently signalled by DMs (with re-
spect to their overall frequencies in the corpus),
and examine what DMs are commonly used to sig-
nal those relations. We provide the distribution
of DMs for mononuclear relations in Table 5 and
the distribution for multinuclear relations in Table
6. The number within parentheses after a relation
name in column 1 (labeled Relation, in both ta-
bles) refers to the number of instances the relation
occurs with a DM in the corpus. The number in
column 3 (labeled #, in both tables) refers to the
number of instances a DM (in the corresponding
row) is used for marking the relation. (Note: CC
= coordinating conjunction; SC = subordinating
conjunction; PP = preposition (-al phrase); ADV
= adverb (-ial) phrase)

Table 5 shows that a mononuclear relation is in-
dicated by different DMs14, which belong to dif-
ferent syntactic classes (e.g., CC, SC or ADV).
For example, Result relations are commonly sig-
nalled by the DMs because (SC), and (CC) and
as a result (ADV). Similar distribution of DMs for
multinuclear relations is shown in Table 6. For ex-

14The relations presented in Table 5 (and also Table 6) are
indicated by an even wider variety of DMs in the RST-SC
(see Das (2014)). The distribution here only records the most
frequently used DMs (common DMs) for those relations.

ample, Temporal-same-time relations15 are com-
monly marked by the DMs while (SC), as (SC)
and and (CC).

Finally, we extract the most frequently used
DMs in the RST-SC, and examine the relations
that are signalled by them. In Table 7, we pro-
vide the distribution of the common relations for
those DMs. The number in column 2 (labeled #
DM) refers to the number of instances of a DM
in the RST-SC, and the number in column 5 (la-
beled # Rel) refers to the number of instances for
a relation indicated by that DM in the corpus. The
distribution shows that the DMs and and but (both
CC) are the two most frequent DMs (with over
600 tokens), followed by other DMs like as (SC),
if (SC), when (SC), because (SC) and however
(ADV). As we have seen in Table 5 and 6 that re-
lations are indicated by a wide variety of DMs, Ta-
ble 7 shows the opposite is also true: Each of the
DMs in Table 7 indicates more than one relation
in the corpus16. Furthermore, the relations indi-
cated by these DMs are distributed for mononu-
clear and multinuclear categories. For example,
the DM while is commonly used to indicate, on
the one hand, Antithesis and Concession relations,
which are mononuclear relations, and on the other
hand, Contrast and List relations, which are mult-
inuclear relations.

5 Discussion

As our results show (in Table 4), although over
90% of the RST relations in the RST-SC, re-
gardless of their types (mononuclear or multinu-
clear), contain some sort of signals, only about

15Temporal-same-time relations can be both mononuclear
and multinuclear (see Table 2). Table 6 provides the distri-
bution of DMs for Temporal-same-time when it is used as a
multinuclear relation.

16In Table 7, the DM if is shown to indicate only Condi-
tion relations. In the RST-SC, however, if is also found to
signal other relations, such as Circumstance, Contingency or
Hypothetical (although with relatively lower frequencies).



34

Type Total # # signalled % signalled # with DM % with DM
mono 16526 15424 93.33 2415 14.61
multi 4874 4423 90.75 1481 30.39

Table 4: Distribution of mononuclear and multinuclear relations by signalling

Relation DM # Type
Concession (264) but 100 CC

although 28 SC
despite 24 PP
though 24 SC
while 17 SC

Condition (221) if 162 SC
unless 12 SC

Temporal-before (38) before 31 SC
Antithesis (330) but 182 CC

although 28 SC
however 26 ADV
though 11 ADV

Temporal-after (69) after 48 SC
Temporal-same-time
(63)

when 29 SC

as 18 SC
while 13 SC

Result (87) because 25 SC
and 23 CC
as a result 19 ADV

Reason (112) because 65 SC

Table 5: Common DMs for mononuclear relations

Relation DM # Type
Disjunction (26) or 19 CC
Temporal-same-time
(52)

while 14 SC

as 13 SC
and 9 CC

Contrast (305) but 186 CC
however 22 ADV
while 20 SC
and 17 CC

Cause-result (42) and 15 CC
because 11 SC

Sequence (119) and 69 CC
then 20 ADV

List (818) and 698 CC
but 19 CC
while 16 SC

Table 6: Common DMs for multinuclear relations

15% mononuclear and about 30% multinuclear re-
lations contain a DM. This, however, implies that
most often both mononuclear and multinuclear re-
lations are conveyed by other textual signals. This
is, we believe, an important issue to consider, and
we will touch upon this point after we discuss our
findings about DMs.

The crucial difference between mononuclear
and multinuclear relations for signalling lies in the
proportions of each type of relations containing
a DM (15% vs. 30%). We observe that rela-
tions that differ according to nuclearity also dif-
fer with respect to two additional factors. First,
all RST taxonomies (as shown in Table 1) contain
significantly higher number of mononuclear rela-
tions than multinuclear relations (e.g., the GUM
corpus (Zeldes, 2017) has 16 mononuclear (80%),
but only 4 multinuclear (20%) relations). Further-
more, with respect to the number of tokens in a
corpus, the mononuclear relations also outnumber
multinuclear relations. For example, out of 21,400
relations in the RST-DT (Carlson et al., 2002),
there are 16,526 mononuclear (77.22%) and only
4,874 multinuclear (22.78%) relations. The rel-
atively lower number of multinuclear relations,
both in RST taxonomies and corpora, may im-
ply that mononuclear relations are more basic type
of relations than multinuclear relations. If that is
borne out, then it might also be case that when re-
lations are multinuclear, they would require more
DMs as their signals than mononuclear relations.

The distribution of DMs for mononuclear and
multinuclear relations (in Table 5 and 6) shows a
complex co-occurrence pattern of nuclearity type
and the syntactic membership of DMs. On the one
hand, we observe (in Table 5) that mononuclear
relations are often conveyed by subordinating con-
junctions (SCs). This is evidenced by relations
such as Condition, Reason and Temporal-same-
time (when used as a mononuclear relation) that
(exclusively) employ SCs (among DMs) as their
signals. Similarly (in Table 6), a strong associa-
tion between multinuclear relations and coordinat-
ing conjunctions (CCs) is observed for Disjunc-
tion which is indicated by the CC or.



35

DM # DM Type Relation # Rel Type

and 1043 CC

List 698 multinuclear
Elaboration-additional 76 mononuclear
Sequence 66 multinuclear
Consequence 42 mononuclear
Circumstance 20 mononuclear

but 615 CC

Contrast 186 multinuclear
Antithesis 182 mononuclear
Concession 100 mononuclear
Elaboration-additional 48 mononuclear
List 19 multinuclear

if 180 SC Condition 162 mononuclear

when 168 SC
Circumstance 109 mononuclear
Temporal-same-time 22 mononuclear

as 166 SC
Circumstance 64 mononuclear
Temporal-same-time 18 mononuclear
Comparison 15 mononuclear

because 162 SC

Reason 64 mononuclear
Explanation-argumentative 35 mononuclear
Consequence 21 mononuclear
Result 14 mononuclear
Cause-result 11 multinuclear

while 131 SC

Antithesis 24 mononuclear
Contrast 20 multinuclear
List 16 multinuclear
Concession 17 mononuclear
Temporal-same-time 14 multinuclear

after 101 SC
Temporal-after 48 mononuclear
Circumstance 37 mononuclear

however 92 ADV

Antithesis 26 mononuclear
Contrast 22 multinuclear
Elaboration-additional 14 mononuclear
Concession 11 mononuclear

because of 81 SC
Consequence 21 mononuclear
Reason 19 mononuclear
Result 18 mononuclear

although 62 SC
Antithesis 28 mononuclear
Concession 28 mononuclear

before 60 SC
Temporal-before 31 mononuclear
Circumstance 14 mononuclear

without 51 PP
Circumstance 21 mononuclear
Manner 19 mononuclear

Table 7: Common relations for DMs



36

On the other hand, we observe (in Table 5 and
6) that the opposite pattern also holds, that is,
mononuclear relations are often signalled by CCs
and multinuclear relations frequently contain SCs.
For example, a large proportion of Concession or
Antithesis (both mononuclear relations) employ
the CC but as their signal. Similarly, Temporal-
same-time (as a multinuclear relation) are mostly
indicated by the SCs while and as.

The complex nature of the co-occurrence of nu-
clearity types and DM types is further illustrated
by Table 7 that presents the distribution of com-
mon relations for most frequent DMs in the RST-
SC. For example, the SC while is used to indicate
both mononuclear relations (Antithesis or Conces-
sion) and multinuclear relations (Contrast or List).

In sum, DMs are found to signal multinuclear
relations more often than mononuclear relations.
However, with respect to the DM types, mononu-
clear and multinuclear relations are indicated by
both SCs ad CCs, without having any strong com-
mitment to either type of DMs17. The latter find-
ing is in line with Blühdorn (2008), who finds that
hierarchy and non-hierarchy at the syntactic level
(represented by subordination and coordination,
respectively) does not systematically correspond
to hierarchical and non-hierarchical coherence re-
lations (in effect, mononuclear and multinuclear
relations, respectively) at the discourse level.

Theoretically, the nuclearity status of a span
(nucleus or satellite) in a relation is assigned by
evaluating it against the other span in terms of to
what degree the span is important to the inten-
tion of the writer. In practice, however, determin-
ing the relative importance of spans may not be a
straightforward task. Stede (2008) identifies dif-
ferent factors that influence RST annotators to de-
cide on the nuclearity status of the text segments.
These factors include intention of the writer (rep-
resented in the nucleus and supported by the satel-
lite), recurrence of an idea across different parts
of a text (as a sign of emphasizing importance
for a span), digression from the main topic (as a
sign of less importance for a span), connectives (in
German) and punctuation (e.g., parentheses) that
can mark the nucleus-satellite distinction, syntac-
tic structure (main clause vs. subordinate clause),

17DMs can also belong to two other syntactic classes, PPs
or ADVs. However, since we find only a few DMs of these
types (four ADVs (however, though, as a result and then) and
two PPs (despite and without)), we do not include them in the
present analysis.

or the RST relation definitions themselves that
prescribe the nuclearity status for a span (e.g., re-
porting clause as the satellite for Attribution rela-
tions). If these sources really contribute to iden-
tify the nucleus (or distinguish between the nu-
cleus and satellite), an important venture could
be to examine whether or how signalling inter-
acts with these factors. It seems that some of the
factors are closely associated with the signalling
phenomenon. For example, as our results show,
certain DMs (or connectives) such as if or al-
though, which are SCs, are always used to convey
mononuclear relations.

The association of potential sources of nucle-
arity and relation marking can possibly be made
more substantial if we adopt a wider perspective
of signalling, incorporating other means of sig-
nalling beyond DMs. As mentioned in Section 3,
the RST-SC exploits many different types of sig-
nals, and we argue here that some of these sig-
nals may well be correlated with some of the fac-
tors affecting nuclearity. We provide a few ex-
amples to illustrate this. Syntactic signals such
as auxiliary inversion (as shown in Example 1) or
certain type of subordinate clauses (e.g., particip-
ial or infinitival) may exhibit a strong correlation
with the factor syntactic structure, as suggested by
Stede (2008). Also, parallel syntactic construc-
tions (e.g., Chris is tall; Pat is short.) can indi-
cate or predict the presence of a multinuclear rela-
tion. Similarly, a graphical signal such as an item-
ized list (called items in sequence in the RST-SC)
can be used to signal a multinuclear (List) rela-
tion, while the content within parentheses (as also
suggested by Stede (2008)) can refer to a satellite
span. Furthermore, a reference feature (encoding
a co-reference chain) or semantic feature (repre-
senting a lexical chain) can indicate the presence
of a mononuclear relation (e.g., Elaboration or Re-
statement). We leave an exploration of the inter-
action of other relational signals and nuclearity as
one of our future endeavors from this study.

Furthermore, a rather specific query about the
relationship between nuclearity and signalling re-
lates to the location of the signals, that is, where
the signals occur – in nucleus, in satellite, or in
both spans. We would like to examine, more par-
ticularly, which signal occurs in which span, and
how frequently they occur in one (as opposed to in
the other) span.

We envisage another related line of develop-



37

ment concerning what is suggested by Marcu
(2000) as the ‘strong nuclearity hypothesis’. Ac-
cording to this hypothesis, it is postulated that
when a relation holds between two (composite)
text spans, it should also hold between the nu-
clei of those two spans. We would like to exam-
ine whether it is possible to motivate the ‘strong
nuclearity hypothesis’ by evidence from the sig-
nalling of RST relations. The relevant question to
address here would be if we disregard all the satel-
lites in an RST analysis, whether we would still
have relevant signals left in the remaining nuclei
that can indicate the relations between spans.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have investigated how the notion
of nuclearity correlates with the signalling of co-
herence relations by discourse markers, which are
generally considered to be the most explicit and
reliable signals of coherence relations. Based on
a corpus analysis of RST relations and relational
signals, we have examined how mononuclear and
multinuclear relations are signalled by discourse
markers. Our results have shown that multi-
nuclear relations are indicated more frequently
by discourse markers than mononuclear relations.
However, we did not find conclusive evidence as
to whether these two relation types are more or
less conveyed through coordinating or subordi-
nating conjunctions, the two primary categories
of discourse markers. In order to address the
complex relationship between nuclearity and sig-
nalling more adequately, we have argued for the
need to incorporate in the analysis other types of
relational signals (such as syntactic, graphical or
reference features), which might demonstrate a
more substantial correlation between the notion of
nuclearity in RST and the signalling of coherence
relations.

References
Hardarik Blühdorn. 2008. Subordination and coor-

dination in syntax, semantics, and discourse: Evi-
dence from the study of connectives. In Cathrine
Fabricius-Hansen and Wiebke Ramm, editors, ‘Sub-
ordination’ versus ‘Coordination’ in Sentence and
Text: A cross-linguistic perspective, pages 59–85.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen
Okurowski. 2002. RST Discourse Treebank,
LDC2002T07. Philadelphia. Linguistic Data Con-
sortium.

Iria da Cunha, Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno, and Ger-
ardo Sierra. 2011. On the Development of the RST
Spanish Treebank. In Proceedings of the 5th Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop, LAW V ’11, pages 1–
10, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Debopam Das. 2014. Signalling of Coherence Rela-
tions in Discourse. Phd dissertation, Simon Fraser
University, Canada.

Debopam Das and Maite Taboada. 2017. RST Sig-
nalling Corpus: A corpus of signals of coher-
ence relations. Language Resources Evaluation,
52(1):149–184.

Debopam Das and Maite Taboada. 2018. Signalling
of Coherence Relations in Discourse, Beyond Dis-
course Markers. Discourse Processes, 55(8):743–
770.

Debopam Das, Maite Taboada, and Paul McFetridge.
2015. RST Signalling Corpus, LDC2015T10.
Philadelphia. Linguistic Data Consortium.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Daniel Marcu. 2000. The Theory and Practice of Dis-
course Parsing and Summarization. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Erick Galani Maziero, Thiago Alexandre Salgueiro
Pardo, Iria da Cunha, Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno,
and Eric SanJuan. 2011. DiZer 2.0 An Adaptable
On-line Discourse Parser. In Proceedings of the III
RST Meeting (8th Brazilian Symposium in Informa-
tion and Human Language Technology, pages 1–17,
Cuiabá/MT, Brazil.

Michael O’Donnell. 2008. The UAM Corpustool:
Software for corpus annotation and exploration. In
Proceedings of the XXVI Congreso de AESLA, pages
3–5, Almeria, Spain.

Manfred Stede. 2008. RST revisited: Disentan-
gling nuclearity. In Cathrine Fabricius-Hansen and
Wiebke Ramm, editors, ’Subordination’ versus ’Co-
ordination’ in Sentence and Text: A cross-linguistic
perspective, pages 33–58. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.

Manfred Stede. 2016. Rhetorische Struktur. In Man-
fred Stede, editor, Handbuch Textannotation: Pots-
damer Kommentarkorpus 2.0. Universitätsverlag,
Potsdam.

Bonnie Webber, Rashmi Prasad, Alan Lee, and Ar-
avind Joshi. 2018. The Penn Discourse Treebank
3.0 Annotation Manual. Report, The University of
Pennsylvania.

Amir Zeldes. 2017. The GUM corpus: creating mul-
tilayer resources in the classroom. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, 51:581–612.

https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2002T07
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2002T07
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2018966.2018967
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2018966.2018967
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10579-017-9383-x
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10579-017-9383-x
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10579-017-9383-x
https://doi.org/10.1080/0163853X.2017.1379327
https://doi.org/10.1080/0163853X.2017.1379327
https://doi.org/10.1080/0163853X.2017.1379327
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2015T10

