




































Decision-making, Risk, and Gist Machine Translation 

in the Work of Patent Professionals 

Mary Nurminen 

Tampere University 

Kalevantie 4 

FI-33100 Tampere, Finland 
mary.nurminen@tuni.fi 

 Abstract 

This is the first study on how patent pro-

fessionals use gist machine translation 

(MT) in their work. Inductive, qualitative 

research methods were adopted to explore 

the role of gist MT specifically in deci-

sion-making. Results show that certain de-

cisions by patent professionals rely on gist 

MT, that the decision to involve human 

translation is often based on a risk assess-

ment, and that certain factors in the patent 

environment give affordances for the use 

of gist MT. The study contributes to the 

body of knowledge on patent MT users 

and on gist MT users in general. 

1 Introduction 

Machine translation (MT) for patents has been 

developed for a few decades and a broad body of 

research is devoted to the technologies and 

techniques for producing patent MT. The 

professionals who work with patents – patent 

attorneys, counsels, examiners, etc. – use this MT 

in its raw, unedited form to obtain a basic 

understanding, or gist, of patent documents that 

they need but that are in languages they do not 

understand. Although their use of this raw MT 

(termed gist MT in this article) has been 

widespread for approximately a decade, very little 

research has been conducted on these MT users. 

In fact, while the number of studies on one group 

of professionals who use MT in their work, 

translators, has increased in recent years, research 

on other professional groups who use the 

technology remains scarce.  

                                                 

© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 
CCBY-ND. 

 

 

The main objective of this article is to provide 

the first study focused specifically on the users of 

patent MT. The article presents the results of a 

qualitative, exploratory study based on interviews 

with a small group of patent professionals who use 

MT in their daily work. Three themes were inves-

tigated for the article: the types of decisions patent 

professionals make based on machine-translated 

information, the risk assessment they use when 

deciding between relying on gist MT or opting for  

human translation, and finally, the environmental 

factors that appear to give affordances for the use 

of gist MT in this context.  

Two important aspects of patent MT are not in 

the scope of this study. First, the article does not 

focus on the issue of quality of MT output, as that 

has already been studied in numerous other arti-

cles. Instead, I wanted to concentrate on exploring 

other factors that influence gist MT use. Second, 

another key application of patent MT is its use by 

professional post-editors to enhance their transla-

tion process. These users are not included in the 

scope of this study. 

The article will help to inform research and so-

lution development in the patent MT field. It will 

also contribute to studies of different professions’ 

use of gist MT and to a general understanding of 

gist MT users. Better knowledge of how MT is 

used in different contexts and what contributes to 

successful use will help us to define what makes a 

potential use case good, or conversely poor, for 

gist MT use. In addition, research on experienced 

users of this form of artificial intelligence can give 

us insights into the needs of users of other AI tech-

nologies.  

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 32



The structure of the article is as follows: the 

next section contains a review of related work.  

This is followed by a description of the data and 

methods used in this study. Section 4 discusses the 

types of decisions that patent professionals report 

making based on gist MT. Section 5 describes the 

risk assessments that informants appeared to un-

dertake when deciding on ordering human trans-

lation. Section 6 focuses on the factors in the work 

environment that appear to support the use of gist 

MT. Final conclusions and suggestions for further 

studies are presented in Section 7. 

2 Related work 

To the best of my knowledge, thus far no studies 

have been conducted on how patent professionals 

use gist MT in their everyday work. A few 

experimental studies have been done. Larroyed 

(2018) and Tinsley et al. (2012) describe 

evaluation experiments in which one evaluation is 

performed by real patent professionals. A number 

of studies describe technical solutions for patent 

MT, and some of those include discussions of 

some aspects of MT in patent professionals’ work, 

for example, Tinsley (2017), Rossi and Wiggins 

(2013), and List (2012). In addition to these, a few 

studies that focus on patent searchers also allude 

briefly to MT in patent search, including Joho et 

al. (2010) and McDonald-Maier (2009). 

To date there is only a small body of research 

on professional areas where gist MT is used. Pro-

fessional translation has been studied to some ex-

tent, though in that industry MT is predominantly 

used for dissemination and not for gisting. Indus-

tries with reported use of gist MT include cus-

tomer support, academia, medicine and the legal 

field. Customer support groups began to offer 

multilingual access to knowledge base articles 

through gist MT in the early 2000s. However, al-

though several articles describe these solutions 

(e.g. Stewart et al., 2010; Dillinger and Gerber, 

2009), very little user experience research has 

been undertaken, as stated in one of the few stud-

ies on actual users (Burgett, 2015: 30). A growing 

body of research focuses on the use of MT in aca-

demia. Much of this focuses on the effects of MT 

on education and students, but some of the studies 

also cover educators’ viewpoints, such as Bowker 

and Eghoetz’s (2007) study on the acceptability of 

MT in a university setting and Bowker and Bui-

trago’s (2019) book on using MT in research. 

Health care is another field where gist MT is be-

ginning to be researched. Liu and Watts (2019) 

give a good overview of current studies on mobile 

MT use in health care. Most recently, John Tinsley 

describes the emergence of new use cases for gist 

MT in two different industries: legal and life sci-

ences (Beninatto and Stevens, 2019). Both cases 

are similar to the patent case in that MT is mainly 

used to sift through large numbers of documents 

to categorize and then locate the ones that need 

further scrutiny and possibly human translation.   

Work in the area of risk and translation has ex-

amined risk assessment and management strate-

gies either as part of the individual translator’s 

work (Pym, 2015; Pym and Matsushita, 2018), or 

from the perspective of the translation process and 

service provider (Canfora and Ottmann, 2018). 

Canfora and Ottmann (2016) present a model for 

risk management for internal translation pro-

cesses, including a risk matrix combining the 

probability of risk and the potential consequences. 

A recent paper by Nitzke, Hansen-Schirra and 

Canfora (2019) introduces a model for assessing 

the risk associated with using post-edited or gist 

MT. Nonetheless, the focus of that study is primar-

ily the post-editing context, while scenarios in-

volving unedited MT remain mostly unexplored. 

3 Methods 

The main data for this study was gathered through 

interviews with nine patent professionals working 

in Scandinavia. The term patent professional in 

this study refers to professionals in the intellectual 

property rights (IPR) field who use their expertise 

in patents to assist and guide others (internal or 

external groups) in their IPR processes. These 

professionals hold a variety of titles, such as 

Patent Counsel, Patent Attorney, and Patent 

Examiner. The informants for the study are 

presented in Table 1. 

 
Type of informant N 

Patent professionals working in compa-

nies that are active in filing and prose-

cuting patent applications  

5 

Patent professionals working in an IPR 

service provider 

2 

Patent professionals working in a  

government patent office 

2 

Total  9 
Table 1. Informants interviewed for the study 

I included informants from the key areas where 

patent professionals work: private companies, IPR 

service providers, and governmental 

organizations. The largest group consisted of 

professionals working in companies that file 

patent applications. This is somewhat reflective of 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 33



the 2010 survey by Joho et al., in which 88% of 

respondents reported working predominately with 

internal clients (Joho et al., 2010: 16), which 

indicates that they worked in patent-filing and 

prosecuting companies. In addition to the 

interviews, I gathered background information 

through talking to people involved in creating and 

maintaining patent MT solutions. 

The average age of the informants was 47 and 

the average length of experience in the IP field 

was considerable, 17 years. The group was highly 

educated; all had at least a master’s level educa-

tion and four of the nine held a PhD degree. This 

is similar to the educational levels reported in 

Joho et al. (2010).  

The interviews were all semi-structured discus-

sions that occurred either at informants’ work-

places or through Skype audio calls. They were 

conducted in the time frame of April 2018 to Feb-

ruary 2019. The two themes of context and trans-

parency were explored in the interviews. I used a 

variety of sources in the development of the ques-

tions. ISO standard 9241-210:2010 (ISO, 2010) 

defines context of use through the broad catego-

ries of users, goals and tasks of users, and envi-

ronment, and this was a good starting point. I re-

lied on descriptions of patent processes in official 

documents (PRH, 2018; EPO, 2018) and other 

sources (Alberts et al., 2017; Oesch et al., 2014; 

Joho et al., 2010) to identify the touchpoints users 

might have with MT and to develop questions 

around those touchpoints. The questions also de-

veloped somewhat over the course of the data-

gathering phase. 

Most of the interviews were recorded, tran-

scribed with the aid of automatic transcription 

tools, and then post-edited. One interview was not 

recorded due to technical difficulties, so the data 

from that interview consisted of my notes taken 

during the interview. A total of 12 hours of inter-

viewing was conducted, and 229 pages of tran-

scription and note data compiled for analysis. 

The data was analyzed by closely following the 

thematic analysis method outlined by Braun and 

Clarke (2013, 2006, n.d.) with additional guidance 

from Merriam and Tisdell (2016). The data was 

approached from a semantic perspective, wherein 

“coding and theme development reflect the ex-

plicit content of the data” (Braun and Clarke, n.d.) 

rather than searching for underlying meanings in 

the data. One reason for this was that the topic of 

the use of technology at work was fairly straight-

forward. Also, the focus was on the context, as de-

scribed by informants, instead of each informant’s 

personal experiences.  

At a point later in the analysis process, a sum-

mary of findings was compiled and a member 

check performed by three of the informants. They 

were asked to compare the results against their 

own experiences and to comment on any incon-

gruences they may detect. These comments were 

then reviewed and incorporated into the analysis. 

A qualitative method was chosen for this study 

for specific reasons. First, it was necessary be-

cause this is the first study on how this group uses  

gist MT, and research at such an early stage often 

requires inductive, exploratory methods. When 

designing the study, there simply was not enough 

knowledge on these users to allow for the crafting 

of a quantitative study such as a survey. A second 

reason was that the small body of research on gist 

MT users in general tends to rely on surveys and 

laboratory experiments. I believed there was a 

need for in-depth studies that would give us a 

more nuanced view of the use of gist MT. I se-

lected interviewing for data-gathering because it 

proved difficult to persuade exceedingly busy pa-

tent professionals to participate in a study using 

more time-consuming qualitative methods such as 

diaries. The interviews required a commitment of 

only 1.5 hours, which seemed to be more tenable.  

4 Decisions that rely on gist MT  

Rossi and Wiggins (2013: 116) argue that “In the 

patent field, MT is used as a support tool for 

performing novelty, validity, infringement or 

state-of-the-art searches, and to provide a first 

understanding of the content of retrieved 

publications.” However, is gaining a “first 

understanding” really the only way patent 

professionals use MT, or do they actually make 

decisions based on gist MT? For example, Henisz-

Dostert’s study of scientists’ use of MT to 

understand Russian scientific articles reported 

that, contrary to predictions by early scholars that 

MT would be used only for scanning, scientists 

used MT “more as a tool of information than as a 

tool for the selection of information.” (Henisz-

Dostert, 1979: 180). One goal of this study was to 

explore the ways in which patent professionals 

use gist MT and the decisions they make with its 

help. 

4.1 Relevance  

One of the primary uses for patent MT, as defined 

by Tinsley (2017: 411) is “[to] provide an on-

demand ‘gist’ translation of foreign patents for 

information purposes to determine relevance.” 

The primacy of using gist MT for this purpose was 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 34



also found in this study. Informants described how 

they used gist MT when searching for ‘prior art’ 

(patent documents that show that an invention is 

not new and therefore present an obstacle to 

patenting it). For each patent document (either a 

patent or a patent application) found in their 

search, they need to decide whether it is relevant 

to the IPR process they are working on or not. 

Informants discussed four main IPR processes in 

which they use machine-translated information to 

determine relevance: (1) the patenting process 

(Does this invention show enough novelty that it 

could be patented?), (2) freedom to operate (Can 

we launch our products in this market or are there 

patents that we would be infringing on if we 

launched?), (3) monitoring (Is this patent 

application sufficiently relevant to our work that I 

should monitor its progress?), and (4)  

infringement (Is this patent infringing on one of 

our patents or are we in danger of infringing on 

someone else’s patent?).  

The results of this study reveal that the decision 

on relevance is very often made without the help 

of human translation. Therefore, the first decision 

made is not whether or not a patent document 

should be sent for human translation, but whether 

or not it appears to be relevant, and that is deter-

mined largely on the basis of gist MT: 

I would say it’s [the use of MT] successful in 90 

percent of the time because the conclusion is, 

this is not relevant…So rejecting things from fur-

ther analysis I think is done 9 out of 10 reviews 

of the machine translated documents. (PP4) 1 

It is important to note that the decision on 

relevance is not as minor a decision as it may 

seem. The consequences of mistakenly discarding 

a patent document that seems irrelevant can be 

considerable, as was reported by informants: 

...for example I can decide about a patent that it 

is not in any way relevant for us, which is a 

pretty strong decision, because then we shut it 

out completely, the whole followup of the patent, 

and we just think that that won’t be harmful, but 

then it could be that if there’s a mistake in the 

translation then it turns out that it really is harm-

ful. But those are the kinds of decisions I make. 

(PP1) 2  

At work we talk about how most mistakes take 

place because someone overlooks a relevant pa-

tent…when a mistake happens, it is most likely 

to be caused by that. But mistakes can come from 

                                                 
1 Here and elsewhere: PP = Patent Professional.  

Also, quotes have been edited for fluency. 

other reasons than the machine translation. 

There are just so many patents to go through. 

But putting it into the ‘not interesting’ pile is a 

risk. (PP3) 

4.2 Monitoring 

A second type of decision that is very often made 

based solely on gist MT is the decision to tag a 

patent application for monitoring. If an 

application is deemed relevant, patent 

professionals may decide to follow its progress 

throughout its prosecution. Besides being used to 

determine enough relevance for monitoring, Gist 

MT is also used to understand communications on 

the application’s prosecution or to review changes 

in the application. Tagging an application for 

monitoring also often means that the decision on 

human translation is postponed, because the 

application will most likely change before it is 

granted: 

…if it’s about pending patents then the claim 

scope is changing all the time, so therefore even 

if you would translate it and get it kind of right 

in the beginning, it’s something different when 

it’s granted…so therefore there's no point maybe 

to get it human translated at the early stage 

(PP2) 

4.3 Patenting and opposition 

A third area in which informants reported using 

gist MT in decision-making was during the 

patenting process. Within the European context, 

the role of MT in the examination process is 

explained in official guidelines: 

In order to overcome the language barrier con-

stituted by a document in an unfamiliar non-of-

ficial language, it might be appropriate for the 

examiner to rely on a machine translation of 

said document…A translation has to serve the 

purpose of rendering the meaning of the text in 

a familiar language…Therefore mere grammat-

ical or syntactical errors which have no impact 

on the possibility of understanding the content 

do not hinder its qualification as a translation. 

(EPO, 2018, Part G, Chap. IV-4)  

Patent examiners typically share the results of 

their patentability search with patent applicants, 

and any relevant patent document that is in 

another language is provided in machine-

translated form. Unless the applicant decides it is 

so important that they will provide a human 

2 Some quotes and passages translated by author. 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 35



translation, prosecution proceeds based on the 

machine translation. MT is occasionally used in 

opposition proceedings as well: 

PP9: I mean normally in opposition cases at the 

EPO, European Patent Office, you can use ma-

chine translations.  

Interviewer: OK. And in the Finnish patent of-

fice as well?  

PP9: Yes you can do that. I have never been 

asked to provide a human translation about any 

of these. 

5 Deciding on human translation: an  
exercise in risk assessment  

As far as translation is concerned, the most 

important decision patent professionals or patent 

applicants make is whether to rely on gist MT for 

understanding a relevant document or to have it 

translated by a human. Nitzke et al. (2019) 

proposes that this type of decision involves risk 

and that an assessment of those risks should be 

part of the process of decision-making. Evidence 

of such a risk assessment emerged in this study, 

with patent professionals weighing various factors 

before deciding on gist MT or human translation. 

The factors that supported human translation of a 

patent document included the riskiness of the IPR 

process in which the document would be used, the 

assumed relevance and importance of the other-

language document, and the potential 

consequences if a misunderstanding would occur 

due to an error in the gist MT. The factors 

supporting the use of gist MT were lower costs, 

quicker access to information, and trust that the 

patent document is adequately understood. This 

assessment was summarized by some informants: 

…the more important decision, the less you do 

the decision based only on the machine transla-

tion. (PP8) 

…if the context is clear then it’s OK as I see it, I  

trust the machine translations enough, but some-

times when we are in borderline decisions it’s 

required to have a proper human transla-

tion…So it’s more a question of the uncertainty 

margin of the translation with respect to what we 

are deciding. (PP4) 

Each side of this assessment is examined more 

closely below. 

5.1 Arguments for human translation 

One of the top considerations for triggering 

human translation was the IPR process the other-

language relevant document would be used in, 

with some processes being seen as more high-risk 

than others. Cases that involved infringement or 

freedom to operate might involve considerable 

costs and legal involvement, and these were 

consequently cited as cases in which human 

translation is often needed: 

It depends on the costs involved in the case…if 

you are in a patent battle, if there is an infringe-

ment case…there's a lot of money involved. If 

you want to be absolutely sure then you have to 

have a human translator. (PP9) 

If, based on the gist MT, a patent document 

appears to be highly relevant and important to a 

case, that would also serve as a strong argument 

for triggering human translation: 

…probably that also depends a little bit on the 

case. If it is highly important then I would 

choose immediately to get it translated, or 

claims or parts of it, translated with human 

translation. (PP2) 

Informants also mentioned potential 

consequences as a factor in the decision on human 

translation: 

If we make the wrong decision and allow a prod-

uct to the market which does not have freedom 

to operate, there is a risk of using time and 

money and goodwill in a court case and poten-

tially being responsible to cover the damages of 

a client. (PP4) 

5.2 Arguments for relying on gist MT 

The main arguments for using gist MT are clearly 

that translation is very quick and does not generate 

extra costs. MT is provided at no cost by various 

national and international patent offices such as 

the Japan Patent Office and the EPO, and it is 

commonly included by default in commercial 

patent search tools. Its use is also made easy 

through tight integration to patent search tools and 

processes.  

A complete understanding of the arguments for 

relying on MT in the risk assessment, however, re-

quires consideration of another important ele-

ment: how strong is the patent professional’s trust 

that they have a sufficient understanding of a pa-

tent document? Much of this depends on the qual-

ity of the machine translation, of course. However, 

past studies have shown that other factors can en-

hance users’ abilities to understand MT, and those 

were reported as helpful in this study as well. Two 

factors appeared to contribute to trust in under-

standing in this case study: the fact that patent pro-

fessionals rely on other resources than the gist 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 36



MT, and the background knowledge that patent 

professionals possess. These are discussed further 

in the following subsections. 

Understanding does not depend on MT alone  

The understanding of the machine translation of a 

patent document can be seen as a process of trying 

different alternatives until a sufficient level of 

understanding is achieved. The first alternative is 

to combine the gist MT with other resources, such 

as drawings and chemical formulas in the 

original-language patent documents, to enhance 

understanding. This combining of MT and 

auxiliary, often multimodal, information to obtain 

an understanding of other-language texts has been 

reported in other studies on MT users (Nitzke et 

al., 2019; Pituxcoosuvarn et al., 2018; Suzuki and 

Hishiyama, 2016; Way, 2013; Gaspari, 2004; 

Henisz-Dostert, 1979). Auxiliary information had 

a clear role in patent professionals’ reports of their 

work in this study as well: 

When it's good enough that I can see that it's rel-

evant? It’s a combination of understanding the 

figures and understanding the machine trans-

lated text. (PP6) 

Oh yeah then you have to look at the original 

because it doesn’t translate any of those chemi-

cal formulas…And then if they are totally differ-

ent then it could be that I don’t even make any 

translation because then I know that, well, they 

are talking about totally different things. (PP7) 

A second alternative patent professionals resort to 

are alternative machine translations from other 

MT tools, a practice that has been noted in earlier 

studies (Gao et al., 2015; Tinsley et al., 2012). At 

least one commercial patent search tool offers 

users access to both their own MT solution and the 

alternative of Google Translate in the same 

window. Although a few informants mentioned 

using a general tool such as Google Translate for 

alternative translations, a more common method 

was to try the MT tools provided by specific 

governmental patent offices: 

I do the EPO machine translation first and if 

that’s not more understandable then I go directly 

to the patent office that the publication came 

from, so Chinese or Japanese. (PP5) 

…for instance if it’s a Chinese document I go to 

Chinese Patent Office website and try to find the 

same application there…and usually it’s a dif-

ferent machine translation and that actually 

helps sometimes, when you have two machine 

translations you can read them at the same time 

and maybe it gives you a better impression. 

(PP6) 

The next alternative professionals can turn to are 

the other patent professionals they collaborate 

with. Instead of ordering a human translation of a 

text that is not sufficiently understood, they can 

ask the patent professionals who work more 

closely with the inventors (for example, the patent 

professionals in the country which the patent 

originates from) to clarify unclear passages for 

them.  

Background knowledge aids understanding 

As mentioned previously, the informants of this 

study were both highly experienced in the IPR 

field and well educated. Their contextual 

knowledge and competences in languages 

appeared to be important factors in helping them 

understand and use machine-translated 

information effectively.  

The importance of MT users’ knowledge of 

context in helping them understand machine-

translated texts has been reported in a number of 

studies. Henisz-Dostert (1979) found that a user’s 

familiarity with the subject matter was seen as the 

main factor in determining the understandability 

of machine-translated texts. Other studies that 

have highlighted the importance of contextual 

knowledge include Bowker and Buitrago (2019), 

Yasouka and Björn (2011), Yamashita et al. (2009) 

and Smith (2003).  

In the patent context, contextual knowledge is 

often divided between the patent professionals, 

who know the patent genre, and the inventors or 

researchers behind the patents, who know the sub-

ject matter better. These competences, their role in 

helping to understand machine-translated patents, 

and the division of expertise between patent pro-

fessionals and inventors were a common theme in 

the interviews.  

And when you understand…if we’re talking 

about patent publications there’s a certain 

structure and there’s a certain format that 

they’re in, then it's in a way easy easier to follow. 

(PP2) 

Several previous studies have examined the role 

of users’ language competence in gist MT 

scenarios (Nurminen and Papula, 2018; 

Nurminen, 2016; Henisz-Dostert, 1979). In the 

current study, this background competence also 

appeared to be a factor in successful use of MT. 

Although none of the informants spoke English as 

their native language, all used English daily in 

their work. Their MT use was mainly from other 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 37



languages into English, not into their native 

languages. Besides English, all informants had 

varying levels of competence in other languages, 

with German being the most often mentioned, 

followed by French, Spanish, Swedish, Italian, 

Dutch, and Japanese. Several informants 

indicated that competence in the source language 

helped them to understand texts that were 

machine-translated from those languages: 

And quite often I actually combine a machine 

translation and original reading…the comple-

mentarity of understanding the structure of the 

language better than the machine, and the ma-

chine understanding more words than I do, is a 

good complementarity. (PP4) 

However, the reality is that the major languages 

patent documents are translated from are Chinese, 

Japanese, and Korean because these countries are 

significant producers of patents. China became 

the world’s largest patent producer in 2011. By 

2017, China had filed 1.3 million patent 

applications, more than double the number filed 

by the second country, the U.S. (WIPO, 2018: 40). 

The predominance of China was mentioned in all 

interviews. We can assume from this that 

competence in the three major patent languages of 

Chinese, Japanese, and Korean would be 

particularly useful for patent professionals. 

6 Affordances in the patent context  

Thus far this article has presented a scenario in 

which patent professionals can and do use gist MT 

to make certain decisions. The article has also 

discussed the factors involved in their decisions to 

rely on gist MT or to order human translation. 

However, in the analysis of this study’s data, 

certain contextual factors emerged which 

appeared to make affordances for the use of gist 

MT. These affordances must be considered when 

discussing this specific case because they appear 

to play an important role in making the use of gist 

MT tenable, and an understanding of this 

ecosystem’s use of gist MT is incomplete without 

them. The following sections explore two factors 

of affordance, risk tolerance and legitimacy.  

6.1 Risk-tolerant environment 

In the book titled Translation Quality Assessment, 

Andy Way states that MT systems need to be 

evaluated with the knowledge of what the system 

would be used for. Way also notes that “[o]f 

course, some objectives could be more tolerant of 

MT errors than others” (Way, 2018: 170). Certain 

features of the patent environment, while perhaps 

not fully error-tolerant, appeared to make 

affordances for the risks and potential errors tied 

to the use of gist MT. 

The patenting process is long and iterative, with 

multiple parties often reviewing the same or sim-

ilar texts. Different stakeholders may have differ-

ent interpretations of a patent application’s scope 

and claims. To address these issues, the process 

contains space for discussion and mechanisms for 

stakeholders to examine and challenge each 

other’s work. One of these is explained in the 

Finnish Patent and Registration’s Patent Guide: 

Even though inventions must show absolute nov-

elty, it is not possible for patent authorities to 

clarify all public information when examining 

an application. For this reason, the examination 

process is augmented by the third-party obser-

vation and opposition processes, in which third 

parties, for example competitors, can bring to 

the attention of the authorities issues that did not 

emerge during the examination of the patent ap-

plication. (PRH, 2018: 19)  

The nature of this process means that there are 

also multiple stages where errors in the 

understanding of gist MT can be detected and 

corrected. This was described by one informant:  

Well of course you can get the wrong impression 

of the subject matter in the document, but I don’t 

see that it’s a really big risk because the patent 

application process is a long process, so if my 

interpretation of some kind of document based 

on the machine translation is wrong, I can 

change my mind later, if I see it. It takes usually 

over two years to get a patent so we get the an-

swer from the applicant and we probably write 

another office action and then the applicant re-

plies again, so it’s a conversation. So during the 

process there’s many times when these things 

can be dealt with. (PP6) 

Another informant described a case when parties 

examined and challenged each other’s MT work: 

We’ve had these cases where the examiner used 

Google Translate and we translate it using 

EPO’s official site and then we can explain to 

them that ‘now we would like to kindly point out 

that the translation used by the examiner con-

tained a mistake in this spot, and that we have 

this in that same spot, and our version uses the 

terms in this way.’ And we rely on the [machine] 

translation completely…the examiner doesn’t 

understand Japanese and we don’t understand 

Japanese. We are both relying on machine trans-

lation and there is nothing else. (PP1) 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 38



Besides the risk tolerance present in processes, 

the informants in this study displayed a tendency 

to accept the risk involved with using MT and 

making decisions based on it. One reason for this 

might be that the informants were vastly experi-

enced. Another reason might be that the IPR field 

contains other risks besides the use of gist MT, so 

the organizations they work in might have a 

higher willingness to take risks, or “risk appetite” 

as defined by Nitzke et al. (2019). Finally, the ac-

ceptance of risk might be an acknowledgement 

that the risk is simply necessary due to the impos-

sibility of relying on human translation for the 

large volumes of documentation they regularly 

encounter, as voiced by one informant: 

Yes, there is always risk involved. But we have 

so many patents to go through. Hundreds and 

hundreds at a time. It would be impossible if all 

of those had to be translated by a human. Always 

a risk though. (PP3) 

6.2 Legitimacy of MT 

One aspect of the use of MT in the patent 

environment that I did not expect when I began 

my research was the legitimacy that it enjoys. One 

of Merriam-Webster’s definitions for legitimate 

best reflects what it means in this context: 

“conforming to recognized principles or accepted 

[emphasis by author] rules and standards.”3 Three 

different themes in this study illustrated this 

legitimacy: MT use was transparent, the 

boundaries of its legitimacy were documented and 

generally agreed upon by users, and its users had 

a relatively high level of ‘MT literacy.’  

Transparency 

Transparency in gist MT use has been addressed 

in a few reports, most recently in a 2019 Globally 

Speaking Radio podcast in which John Tinsley 

reported that the legal profession is beginning to 

use MT for e-discovery, and that its use is fully 

transparent in that context: “So you go into the 

court and say to the judge, ‘We are taking this 

position on the basis of a machine translation of 

this document into English,’ and that’s legally 

defensible” (Beninatto and Stevens, 2019).  

At least in the European context of this study, 

the first sign of transparency was the inclusion of 

MT in EPO guidelines. Second, descriptions by 

study informants depicted an environment in 

which the role of MT is transparent to all. They 

                                                 
3 https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ 

legitimate 

also reported that MT is transparent to secondary 

users of patent MT, the internal and external cli-

ents the patent professionals work with. The re-

sults of searches these clients receive from patent 

professionals often include documents that are 

machine-translated. These are clearly marked as 

machine translations and they often also include 

the date and MT tool that produced the text. Patent 

professionals discuss MT with the secondary us-

ers, as in this example: 

I would point out that this is a machine transla-

tion and, depending on if the client is a knowing 

patent engineer, then I would maybe give my 

opinion if we need a proper translation or not, 

but then ask what they think. (PP8) 

Boundaries of legitimacy  

An important aspect of legitimacy is that it is 

bound to a specific scope. The ‘recognized 

principles or accepted rules and standards’ 

referred to in the definition provided earlier are 

agreed upon by a certain group for a certain 

purpose, and the boundaries of applicability are 

recognized by the participants. In this study, the 

boundaries of legitimacy for MT were sometimes 

mentioned during answers to other questions: 

“For information purposes, it’s fine. For use as a 

legal text, no.” (PP3) But in the interviews I also 

asked directly, “In what situations is it not OK to 

use machine translation?” The responses 

indicated some agreement on the areas in which 

MT should not be used, such as when filing patent 

applications: 

…when you’re translating your application to 

other languages – like we have seen some kind 

of, I think they are usually applicants from Asia, 

that file an application here and usually they ap-

ply in English, but you can really see that their 

application is machine translated from the Chi-

nese version – not OK. (PP6) 

There was very clear agreement that MT should 

not be used in legal settings, as in this example in 

which an informant described a process involving 

another company’s potential infringement of their 

patent: 

We would start with searching prior art and use 

MT. Our aim is to see if there’s overlap with our 

patent or not. If we find something that looks in-

 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 39



teresting, then we would order human transla-

tion of it. We would not just go ahead on that 

with machine translated information. (PP3) 

MT literacy  

In 1993 Church and Hovy defined six 

“desiderata” for a good use case for MT. Among 

the six were: “it should set reasonable 

expectations” and “it should be clear to the users 

what the system can and cannot do” (Church and 

Hovy 1993: 257). Bowker and Buitrago (2019) 

expanded this idea by coining the term MT 

literacy, and then applying it to the case of MT use 

in academic work. On the basis of their definition, 

I described MT literacy for the context of this 

study as a patent professional’s ability to: (1) 

comprehend the basics of how machine 

translation systems process texts, (2) understand 

how machine translation systems are or can be 

used (by oneself or others working with patents) 

to find and read patent documents within the 

context of IPR processes, and (3) appreciate the 

wider implications associated with the use of 

machine translation. Based on this definition, the 

informants in this study displayed a generally high 

level of MT literacy. They appeared to understand 

the basics of MT technologies, knew how to 

access different MT tools, and were aware of the 

possibility and consequences of translation errors. 

They also had experience with different types of 

MT tools and noticed improvements in quality 

over time: 

They all [languages] have become better, and es-

pecially nowadays if you make a machine trans-

lation for some ‘normal’ language, for German 

or French, they are really good. (PP9) 

Perhaps one of the clearest signs of the high level 

of general MT literacy was an observation I made 

throughout the study: the hype issues currently 

visible in other spheres (for one example, see 

Hassan et al., 2017 followed by Toral et al., 2018) 

do not seem to be occurring in patent MT. In the 

present study, MT was considered to be one tool 

among others and people were aware of its uses 

and limitations. I heard no reports of overreaching 

claims on MT capabilities.  

7 Conclusions 

The main objective of this study was to explore 

the types of decisions patent professionals make 

based on machine-translated information, the risk 

assessment they use when deciding between 

relying on gist MT or using human translation, 

and the environmental factors that appear to 

support the use of gist MT in this context. The 

results revealed that patent professionals routinely 

make decisions on relevance and monitoring 

based on gist MT, and that the patenting process 

also relies on it. In the key decision of initiating 

human translation, patent professionals tend to 

weigh the riskiness of the IPR process in which 

the translated patent document would be used, the 

assumed relevance and importance of the 

document, and the potential consequences of 

misunderstanding against the lower costs, quicker 

access to information, and trust in a good enough 

understanding of the patent document. That 

understanding is often based not only the gist MT, 

but also other factors, such as auxiliary 

information sources and patent professionals’ 

contextual and linguistic knowledge. The 

environmental factors of risk tolerance and 

legitimacy for gist MT also support the use of MT. 

The study contributes to our knowledge of how 

people, and specifically professional groups, use 

gist MT. It explores factors that can enhance the 

use of gist MT, and this understanding will help us 

to define the characteristics of good, as well as 

poor, contexts for gist MT use. In addition, this 

analysis contributes to the growing body of re-

search on users of various types of artificial intel-

ligence. 

This study had certain limitations. The group of 

informants was small and somewhat homogene-

ous, and this influenced the results. Data was gath-

ered through only one method, interviewing. The 

results also focused on patent work in one geo-

graphical area and one specific point in time, and 

the results cannot be considered representative of 

the larger population of patent professionals. Nev-

ertheless, as the first exploratory study of this very 

experienced group of MT users, it fulfilled one of 

the main purposes of inductive research in that it 

uncovered new themes and hypotheses on how a 

specific group uses gist MT and on the contextual 

factors that contribute to their use of it.  

Further studies on this gist MT user group could  

target an expanded group of informants, including 

more diverse participants, other patent MT user 

groups, and less experienced patent MT users. 

Studies incorporating other methods such as con-

textual inquiry, diaries, or quantitative methods 

such as surveys could verify some of the findings 

of this study and might reveal further insights on 

this user group. In addition, it is hoped that we will 

see a growth in the research, and number of re-

searchers, devoted to studying all types of users of 

gist MT. 

 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 40



References 

Alberts, Doreen, Cynthia B. Yang, Ken Koubek, Su-

zanne Robins, Matthew Rodgers, Edlyn Sim-

mons, and Dominic DeMarco. 2017. Introduc-

tion to Patent Searching. In Lupu, Mihai, Katja 

Mayer, Noriko Kando and Anthony J. Trippe, 

editors, Current Challenges in Patent Infor-

mation Retrieval, Second ed. Vol. 29, Springer, 

Berlin Heidelberg. 

Beninatto, Renato and Michael Stevens. 2019. What's 

the Latest with Neural MT? Globally Speaking 

Radio (podcast), episode 75. RWS Moravia. 

Bowker, Lynne and Jairo Buitrago Ciro. 2019. Ma-

chine Translation and Global Research: To-

wards Improved Machine Translation Literacy 

in the Scholarly Community, Emerald Publish-

ing, Bingley, UK. 

Bowker, Lynne and Melissa Ehgoetz. 2007. Exploring 

User Acceptance of Machine Translation Out-

put: A Recipient Evaluation. In Kenny, Dorothy 

and Kyongjoo Ryou, editors, Across Bounda-

ries: International Perspectives on Translation 

Studies, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, New-

castle, UK. 

Braun, Virginia and Victoria Clarke. 2013. Successful 

Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for Be-

ginners. SAGE, Los Angeles, California, USA. 

———n.d. Thematic analysis: reflexive approach,  

accessed March-June, 2019. 
https://www.psych.auckland.ac.nz/en/about/our-

research/research-groups/thematic-analysis.html  

———2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. 

Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2):77–

101. 

Burgett, Will. 2015. Unmoderated Remote Usability 

Testing of Machine Translation Content. TAUS 

Review of Language Business and Technol-

ogy, IV:30–37. 

Canfora, Carmen and Angelika Ottmann. 2018. Of  

ostriches, pyramids, and Swiss cheese: Risks in 

safety-critical translations. Translation Spaces, 

7(2):167–201. 

———2016. Who's afraid of translation risks? 

Presentation at 8th EST Congress, Aarhus, Den-

mark. 

Church, Kenneth W. and Eduard H. Hovy. 1993. Good 

Applications for Crummy Machine Translation. 

Machine Translation, 8:239–258. 

 

 

 

Dillinger, Mike and Laurie Gerber. 2009. Success with 

Machine Translation: Automating Knowledge-

Base Translation, Part 1. ClientSide News, 10. 

EPO: European Patent Office. 2018. Guidelines for 

Examination in the European Patent Office. Eu-

ropean Patent Office, Munich, Germany. 

Gao, Ge, Bin Xu, David Hau, Zheng Yao, Dan 

Cosley, and Susan R. Fussell. 2015. Two is Bet-

ter than One: Improving Multilingual Collabora-

tion by Giving Two Machine Translation Out-

puts. 18th ACM Conference on Computer Sup-

ported Cooperative Work & Social Computing, 

Vancouver, BC, Canada, 852–863. 

Gaspari, Federico. 2004. Online MT Services and 

Real Users' Needs: An Empirical Usability Eval-

uation. 6th Confererence of the Association for 

Machine Translation in the Americas, AMTA 

2014, Washington DC, USA 74–85. 

Hassan, Hany, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal 

Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark, Christian Feder-

mann, Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-

Dowmunt, Will Lewis, Mu Li, Shujie Liu, Tie-

Yan Liu, Renqian Luo, Arul Menezes, Tao Qin, 

Frank Seide, Xu Tan, Fei Tian, Lijun Wu, 

Shuangzhi Wu, Yingce Xia, Dongdong Zhang, 

Zhirui Zhang, and Ming Zhou. 2018. Achieving 

Human Parity on Automatic Chinese to English 

News Translation. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05567 

Henisz-Dostert, Bozena. 1979. Users' evaluation of 

machine translation. In Winter, Werner, editor, 

Machine Translation. Mouton Publishers, The 

Hague. 

ISO. 2010. Ergonomics of Human-System Interaction. 

Part 210, Human-Centred Design for Interactive 

Systems (ISO 9241-210:2010). Suomen stand-

ardisoimisliitto SFS, Helsinki, Finland. 

Joho, Hideo, Leif Azzopardi, and Wim Vandervau-

wheded. 2010. A Survey of Patent Users: An 

Analysis of Tasks, Behavior, Search Functional-

ity and System Requirements. 3rd Information 

Interaction in Context Symposium, New Bruns-

wick, NJ, USA 13–24. 

Larroyed, Aline A. 2018. Machine Translation and 

Disclosure of Patent Information. IIC - Interna-

tional Review of Intellectual Property and Com-

petition Law, 49(7):763–786. 

List, Jane. 2012. Review of machine translation in pa-

tents - Implications for search. World Patent In-

formation, 34(3):193–195. 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 41



Liu, Nancy Xiuzhi and Matthew Watts. 2019. Mobile 

Translation Experience: Current State and Fu-

ture Directions. In Xu, Xiaoge, editor, Impacts 

of Mobile use and Experience on Contemporary 

Society, IGI Global, Hershey, PA, USA. 

McDonald-Maier, Lisa. 2009. esp@cenet: Survey re-

veals new information about users. World Patent 

Information, 31(2):142–143. 

Merriam, Sharan B. and Elizabeth J. Tisdell. 

2016. Qualitative Research: A Guide to Design 

and Implementation. John Wiley & Sons, San 

Francisco, CA, USA. 

Nitzke, Jean, Silvia Hansen-Schirra, and Carmen Can-

fora. 2019. Risk management and post-editing 

competence. The Journal of Specialised Trans-

lation, (31):239–259. 

Nurminen, Mary. 2016. Machine Translation-Medi-

ated Interviewing in Qualitative Research: a Pi-

lot Project. New Horizons in Translation Re-

search and Education, 4:66–84.  

Nurminen, Mary and Niko Papula. 2018. Gist MT  

Users: A Snapshot of the Use and Users of One 

Online MT Tool. 21st Annual Conference of the 

European Association for Machine Transla-

tion, Alicante, Spain 199–208. 

Oesch, Rainer, Heli Pihlajamaa, and Sami Sunila. 

2014. Patenttioikeus [Patent Law]. 3rd ed. Tal-

entum, Helsinki, Finland. 

Pituxcoosuuvarn, Mondheera, Toru Ishida, Naomi 

Yamashita, Toshiyuki Takasaki, and Yumiko 

Mori. 2018. Machine Translation Usage in a 

Children's Workshop. 10th International Con-

ference on Collaboration Technologies, Costa 

de Caparica, Portugal, 57–73. 

PRH: Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus [Finnish Patent and 

Registration Office]. 2018. Patenttiopas [Patent 

Guide].Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus, Helsinki, 

Finland. 

Pym, Anthony. 2015. Translating as risk management. 

Journal of Pragmatics, 85(Aug):67–80. 

Pym, Anthony and Kayo Matsushita. 2018. Risk Miti-

gation in Translator Decisions. Across Lan-

guages and Cultures, 19(1):1–18. 

Rossi, Laura and Dion Wiggins. 2013. Applicability 

and application of machine translation quality 

metrics in the patent field. World Patent Infor-

mation, 35(2):115–125. 

Smith, Ross. 2003. Overview of PwC/Sytranet on-line 

MT Facility. Twenty-Fifth International Confer-

ence on Translating and the Computer, London, 

UK.   

Stewart, Osamuyimen, David Lubensky, Scott Mac-

donald, and Julie Marcotte. 2010. Using Ma-

chine Translation for the Localization of Elec-

tronic Support Content: Evaluating End-User 

Satisfaction. The 9th Conference of the Associa-

tion for Machine Translation in the Americas, 

Denver, Colorado, USA. 

Suzuki, Hiroshi and Reiko Hishiyama. 2016. An 

Analysis of Expert Knowledge Transmission us-

ing Machine Translation Services. Seventh Sym-

posium on Information and Communication 

Technology, 352–359. 

Tinsley, John. 2017. Machine Translation and the 

Challenge of Patents. In Lupu, Mihai, Katja 

Mayer, Noriko Kando and Anthony J. Trippe, 

editors, Current Challenges in Patent Infor-

mation Retrieval, Second ed. Vol. 29, Springer, 

Berlin Heidelberg. 

Tinsley, John, Alexandru Ceausu, Jian Zhang, Heidi 

Depraetere, and Joeri Van de Walle. 2012. IP-

Translator: Facilitating Patent Search with Ma-

chine Translation. AMTA-2012:  Tenth Biennial 

Conference of the Association for Machine 

Translation in the Americas, San Diego, CA, 

USA. 

Toral, Antonio, Sheila Castilho, Ke Hu, and Andy 

Way. 2018. Attaining the Unattainable? Reas-

sessing Claims of Human Parity in Neural Ma-

chine Translation. Third Conference on Machine 

Translation, Brussels, Belgium 113–123. 

Way, Andy. 2018. Quality Expectations of Machine 

Translation. In Moorkens, Joss, Sheila Castilho, 

Federico Gaspari & Stephen Doherty, edi-

tors, Translation Quality Assessment: From 

Principles to Practice, Springer, Cham, Switzer-

land. 

Way, Andy. 2013. Traditional and Emerging use-

Cases for Machine Translation. Translating and 

the Computer, London, UK.  

WIPO: World Intellectual Property Organization. 

2018. World Intellectual Property Indicators 

2018. World Intellectual Property Organization, 

Geneva, Switzerland. 

Yamashita, Naomi, Rieko Inaba, Hideaki Kuzuoka, 

and Toru Ishida. 2009. Difficulties in Establish-

ing Common Ground in Multiparty Groups us-

ing Machine Translation. CHI 2009, the SIGCHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Systems, Boston, MA, USA 679–688. 

Yasouka, Mika and Pernille Bjorn. 2011. Machine 

Translation Effects on Communication: What 

Makes it Difficult to Communicate through Ma-

chine Translation? IEEE, Kyoto, Japan 110-115. 

Proceedings of The 8th Workshop on
Patent and Scientific Literature Translation

Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 42


