




































Free indirect discourse: an insurmountable challenge for literary MT 

systems?  

Kristiina Taivalkoski-Shilov1 

School of Languages and Translation Studies 

Koskenniemenkatu 4 

20014, University of Turku 

Finland 
kristiina.taivalkoski-shilov@utu.fi 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper argues that an essential element 

affecting literary translation – the struc-

ture of narrative discourse – has been 

overlooked in research on literary MT sys-

tems so far. After a brief survey of basic 

concepts of structuralist narratology (Ge-

nette 1972), which are necessary for un-

derstanding essential aspects of literary 

translation, a type of reported speech 

called free indirect discourse is taken as an 

example of the translation problems which 

successful literary MT systems would 

have to tackle. 

1 Introduction 

Over the last few years there has been an 

increasing number of studies that investigate the 

possibilities of using literature-specific MT 

systems in literary translation (see e.g. Lee 2011; 

Besacier 2014; Toral & Way 2015; Toral & Way 

2018). As stimulating as these studies are, most of 

them do not discuss any narrative aspects of 

literary texts and therefore overlook an essential 

dimension of literary translation.  

In this paper I argue that developing a successful 

literary MT system requires knowledge of the 

narrative structure of literary texts – as well as 

technological expertise, knowledge on translation 

workflows and readers’ expectations. Being a 

specialist of (human) literary translation myself, 

my aim is to explain some basic aspects of 

narrative texts as well as their challenges in 

literary translation and that way hopefully feed 

into ethically responsible research on this topic.  

 
1  © 2019 The author. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, 

attribution, CCBY-ND. 

 

In what follows I first define some key concepts 

that are necessary for understanding literary 

translation from a narratological point of view. 

Then I illustrate challenges that the developers of 

literary MT systems must address by discussing a 

particularly thorny question of literary translation: 

rendering free indirect discourse (henceforth FID, 

for a definition see below) in different languages.  

 

2 Narratological Key Concepts for Liter-
ary Translation 

The key concepts presented in this section come 

from classical, structuralist narratology that was 

designed to account for universal phenomena of 

narrative discourse regardless of cultural and 

historical context. In this sense structuralist 

narratology followed the pattern of structural 

linguistics that investigated the general rules and 

conventions of language (Steinby and Mäkikalli 

2017, 9). Even though the representatives of 

classical narratology did not take into account 

changes that occur in the narrative structure when 

a text is translated, nor  other aspects of 

translatedness (see e.g. Schiavi 1996; Tahir 

Gürçağlar, 2002) its key concepts offer a solid 

ground for observing narrative aspects in literary 

translation.  

Steinby and Mäkikalli (2017, 10) point out that 

Gérard Genette’s theory, presented in his seminal 

“Discours du récit” (in Figures III, 1972) became 

the essence of structuralist narratology thanks to 

the clarity and usability of his concepts. They 

write: “Although several of Genette’s concepts, 

particularly focalization, voice, person, the status 

of the narrator, and the story-discourse distinction 

(--), have been the subject of extensive critical dis-

cussion, it is his conceptualization – with some ad-

ditions, such as Wayne Booth’s ‘implied author’ – 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 35



that forms the hard core not only of ‘classical’ nar-

ratology but also of more recent applications of 

narratology in other approaches to literary re-

search.” (Steinby and Mäkikalli 2017, 10)  Owing 

to the centrality of Genette’s notions and their use-

fulness in translation studies as well, the basic nar-

ratological concepts presented here are taken from 

his “Discours du récit” .  

 

2.1 Story, Discourse and Narrating 

Genette’s (1972) theory is based on a fundamental 

division between three narrative levels which are 

interdependent, but all characterized by their own 

temporality (Scheffel et al. 2013, section 2). The 

first level is that of story (histoire), by which 

Genette (1972, 72) means narrative content, in 

other words “the events of the entire narrative in 

chronological and causal order prior to any 

verbalization thereof” (Mani 2013, section 3.1.). 

Naturally these events may not have had real 

existence, in which case they are inferred from 

discourse (récit) that is Genette’s second level. 

For Genette (1972, 74) discourse is the only 

tangible level of narrative that can be the object of 

analysis. Discourse does not necessarily present 

the events in a chronological order and its time 

dimension is fixed by the text whereas the story-

level time dimension is set in the narrated world 

(diegesis) (Scheffel et al. 2013, sections 3.1.1.–

3.1.2.). Discourse is also the level where 

translation takes place and shifts on this level 

might have a repercussion on the two other levels. 

For instance, the fact that the first-person 

narration of Robinson Crusoe was shifted into 

third-person narration in some of the nineteenth-

century German, Swedish and Finnish translations 

turned Crusoe from the narrator of the novel into 

a mere character (see Taivalkoski-Shilov 2015, 

63). Genette’s (1972, 72–73) third level is the 

narrating act itself (narration) and the situation 

where the narrating takes place (for instance 

Marcel relating his past life in A la recherche du 

temps perdu). The narrating should not be 

confused with the real-life composition of the 

fiction. 

Some scholars, such as Meister (2005, 2011) 

have developed computer-based markup tools that 

tag and analyze temporal expressions in literary 

texts (Scheffel et al. 2013, section 3.2.3.4.). Such 

tools could turn out useful if they were integrated 

in literature-specific CAT tools. However, using 

them in fully automatic MT systems would yield 

low-quality translations because temporal expres-

sions can have several functions in a literary text: 

for instance, tense variation is a marker of certain 

forms of reported speech in some languages (e.g. 

English and French). 

 

 

2.2 Focalization 

By creating the term focalization (focalisation) 

Genette wanted to distinguish two aspects of 

narrating that, according to him, had been hitherto 

mixed by several narratologists: narrative voice 

(who speaks?) and focus of narration (who sees?) 

(Genette 1972, 203–206). The notion of 

focalization is a means to answer to the question 

whose point of view orients the narrative 

perspective? Focalization designates the way 

narrative information is restricted in relation to the 

narrator, the characters and other possible entities 

in the storyworld (Niederhoff 2013, sections 1–2). 

Genette (1972, 206) divides focalization into three 

categories. In the case where the narrator knows 

more than the character(s) and relates this 

information to his audience (the so-called 

“omniscient narrator”), the focalization is zero. In 

the case where the narrator tells as much as the 

character knows, the focalization is internal. In the 

third case where the narrator shares less 

information than the character knows the 

focalization is external. 

Focalization is a central concept for FID even 

though Genette later stressed that FID (belonging 

to the domain of who speaks?) and focalization 

(that answers to the question who sees?) should be 

distinguished from one another. As Kathy Mezei 

(1996, 70) points out, “(--) FID is frequently the 

mode by which a narrator focalizes through a 

character, appropriating that character’s words to 

make the reader see through his/her eyes.” 

 

 

2.3 Reported Speech and FID 

Reported speech or the way in which the discourse 

or the thoughts of literary characters are textually 

represented is an inherent part of narrative fiction. 

Genette (1972, 189–203) calls reported speech 

récit de paroles, which highlights the narrator’s 

role as a mediator. The discourse and the thoughts 

of literary characters take place in the narrated 

world (the story-level) and even when characters 

seem to talk without the narrator’s intervention, as 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 36



in direct discourse (see below),2 the narrator only 

pretends to give voice to the character (Genette 

1972, 192).3   

Reported speech appears in many forms rang-

ing from a mention of a speech act to a direct 

quote that seems to reproduce also stylistically the 

character’s speech (see Taivalkoski-Shilov 2010, 

6–13). Types of reported speech can be located on 

a scale according to different criteria (see e.g. Ge-

nette 1972, 191–194; McHale 1978; Leech and 

Short 1981). For the purposes of this paper it suf-

fices to distinguish between three basic types of 

reported discourse:  

indirect discourse (e.g. Mrs. Smith answered 

that she had not seen him that morning.)  

direct discourse (e.g. Mrs. Smith answered: 

“No, I have not seen him this morning.”) 

free indirect discourse (e.g. After Watson’s 

question Mrs. Smith looked startled for a moment 

and then composed herself. No, she had not seen 

him that [or this] morning.) 

The last type, FID, is a hybrid one. The range 

of its formal possibilities is extremely large 

(McHale 1978, 253). It is a combination of the 

narrator’s and character’s discourse that can 

appear in first-person or third-person narratives. 

Ordinarily it combines features of both indirect 

discourse (back-shift of tenses in retrospective 

narration) and direct discourse (deictic adverbs 

like “here” and “now”, exclamation marks etc.). 

(Taivalkoski-Shilov 2006, 142.)  

Genette (1972, 192) points out that one of the 

characteristic aspects of FID is its ambiguity. This 

is partly caused by the fact that FID is not domi-

nated by a “higher clause” (McHale 1978, 253) 

and is not preceded by a reporting verb. That is 

why the interpretation that readers make of it de-

pends on contextual cues and extra-linguistic phe-

nomena (Tammi 2003, 43; Taivalkoski-Shilov 

2006, 142). As Genette (1972, 192) observes, it is 

not always clear whether FID represents the char-

acter’s speech or thought. Another ambiguity is 

between the narrator’s and the character’s voice; 

who is speaking, the narrator or the character? 

Furthermore, is the narrator empathetic or ironic 

towards the character? FID is sometimes also dif-

ficult to distinguish from non-reporting narration, 

which means the narration of other events than the 

speech of the characters (Taivalkoski-Shilov 

2006, 137; Taivalkoski-Shilov 2010, 3). 

 
2 For the “reproductive fallacy” of direct discourse, 

see e.g. Sternberg 1981 and 1982, Rosier 1999, 237–

244, and Taivalkoski-Shilov 2010, 7–11.                                                                                           
3 For Genette the narrator’s control over the 

 

2.4 FID as a translation problem 

FID is a translation problem (Nord 1991, 151) 

that all translators irrespective of their level of 

competence and of the technical conditions of 

their work have to solve (Taivalkoski-Shilov 

2006, 138). Research on the translation of FID 

shows that FID tends to shift into non-reporting 

narration, indirect and direct discourse or into 

other discourse types (Taivalkoski-Shilov 2006, 

138–139). There are several possible explanations 

for this phenomenon. From the perspective of 

literary MT systems, the linguistic one is the most 

relevant. The challenge of translating FID is that 

its linguistic markers vary in different languages 

(see e.g. Kuusi 2003). Owing to differences in 

tense, pronoun, adverb and punctuation systems it 

tends to diminish or even disappear in translation. 

In some cases, this is because the indices of FID 

(for instance, the combination of a past tense verb 

with a present adverb) that are acceptable in one 

language are unacceptable or even ungrammatical 

in another. For example, the temporal systems of 

English and French are asymmetric (Poncharal 

1998, 81–82, 241, 266): English uses the preterite 

tense (simple past) both for the narrator’s 

discourse and FID, whereas modern French 

opposes the past used in narration (le passé 

simple) and the imperfect which is the typical 

tense for FID. Poncharal (1998, 180) concludes 

that in French there is a larger gap between the 

levels of story and discourse than in English. 

(Taivalkoski-Shilov 2006, 139.) 

   

 

4. Concluding remarks 

 

FID often leads to translation shifts in human 

translation. However, these shifts are probably 

more logical and less harmful for the narrative 

structure of the text than those caused by a MT 

system that is incapable of taking narrative 

aspects into account. Professional literary 

translators are capable of making shifts that cause 

least loss in translation and they can also 

compensate for the modifications they have to 

make to the narrative structure of the text. All this 

is so far lacking in MT systems.   

character’s discourse has its limits. According to him 

the character’s voice substitutes for the narrator’s 

voice in the case of free direct discourse, which he 

calls discours immédiat (Genette 1972, 194).  

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 37



The problem with AI so far is that machine 

learning of narrative information requires 

considerable effort and has not been very 

successful. As Mani (2013, section 4) writes: “[In 

computational narratology] Story understanding 

systems (e.g. Wilensky 1978) never got very far, 

since (i) inferring characters’ goals involves a 

large search space and the inferences may need to 

be revised during processing and (ii) humans use 

a great deal of knowledge to interpret even simple 

stories. Given Forster’s exemplifying sentence 

“ The king died and the queen died of grief,” a 

child has no difficulty figuring out why the queen 

was upset, but imparting a body of such 

commonsense knowledge to a computer is 

difficult; (iii) aspects of language that are hard to 

formalize but that are important for story 

interpretation, such as humor, irony, and subtle 

lexical associations, have by and large eluded 

computational approaches.”  

 

 

References 

Besacier, Laurent. 2014. Traduction automatisée d’une 

œuvre littéraire: Une étude pilote [Automatic trans-

lation of a literary work: A pilot study]. 21ème 

Traitement Automatique du Langage Naturel, 

Marseille, 2014. P–T 1: 389–394. URL = 

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/F14-2001  

Genette, Gérard. 1972. Discours du récit : essai de 

méthode. Figures III. Éditions du Seuil, Paris, 65–

282. 

Kuusi, Päivi. 2003. Free indirect discourse in the trans-

lations of Jane Austen’s novels into Finnish and Rus-

sian. In: Pekka Tammi and Hannu Tommola (eds.) 

Linguistic and Literary Aspects of Free Indirect 

Discourse from a Typological Perspective. 

Publications of the Department of Literature and Arts 

6, University of Tampere, Tampere, 25–40. 

Lee, Tong King. 2011. The death of the translator in 

machine translation: A bilingual poetry project. Tar-

get: International Journal of Translation Studies, 

23(1): 92–112. 

Leech, Geoffrey N. and Michael H. Short. 1981. Style 

in Fiction: A Linguistic Introduction to English 

Fictional Prose. Longman, London. 

Mani, Inderjeet. 2013. Computational Narratology. 

Paragraph 9. In: Hühn, Peter et al. (eds.): the living 

handbook of narratology. Hamburg: Hamburg 

University. URL = http://www.lhn.uni-

hamburg.de/article/computational-narratology 

McHale, Brian. 1978. Free Indirect Discourse: a Sur-

vey of Recent Accounts. Poetics and Theory of 

Literature (3): 249–287. 

Meister, Jan Christoph. 2005. Tagging Time in Prolog. 

The Temporality Effect Project. Literary and 

Linguistic Computing 20: 107–24. 

Meister, Jan Christoph. 2011. The Temporality Effect: 

Towards a Process Model of Narrative Time 

Construction. In: Meister J. Ch. and W. Schernus 

(eds.). Time. From Concept to Narrative Construct: 

A Reader. de Gruyter, Berlin, 171–216. 

Mezei, Kathy. 1996. Who Is Speaking Here? Free 

Indirect Discourse, Gender, and Authority in Emma, 

Howards End and Mrs. Dalloway. In: Kathy Mezei 

(ed.) Ambiguous Discourse: Feminist Narratology 

and British Women Writers. The University of North 

Carolina Press, 66 –92. 

Niederhoff, Burkhard. 2013. Focalization, Paragraph 1. 

In: Hühn, Peter et al. (eds.): the living handbook of 

narratology. Hamburg: Hamburg University. URL = 

http://www.lhn.uni-hamburg.de/article/focalization 

Nord, Christiane. 1991. Text Analysis in Translation. 

Theory, Methodology, and Didactic Application of a 

Model for Translation-Oriented Text Analysis. 

Rodopi, Amsterdam. 

Poncharal, Bruno. 1998. La représentation de paroles 

au discours indirect libre en anglais et en français. 

Doctoral dissertation, University of Paris VII.  

Rosier, Laurence. 1999. Le discours rapporté: 

Histoire, théories, pratiques. Duculot, Paris. 

Scheffel, Michael, Antonius Weixler and Lukas 

Werner. 2013. Time. Paragraph 4. In: Hühn, Peter et 

al. (eds.): the living handbook of narratology. 

Hamburg: Hamburg University. URL = 

http://www.lhn.uni-hamburg.de/article/time 

Schiavi, Giuliana. 1996. There is always a Teller in a 

Tale. Target: International Journal of Translation 

Studies, 8(1): 1–21. 

Steinby, Liisa, and Aino Mäkikalli. 2017. Introduction: 

The Place of Narratology in the Historical Study of 

Eighteenth-Century Literature.  In: Steinby Liisa 

and Aino Mäkikalli (eds.) Narrative Concepts in the 

Study of Eighteenth-Century Literature. Amsterdam 

University Press, Amsterdam, 7–37. 

Sternberg, Meir. 1981. Polylingualism as Reality and 

Translation as Mimesis. Poetics Today 2(4): 221–

239. 

Sternberg, Meir. 1982. Proteus in Quotation-Land. 

Mimesis and the Forms of Reported Discourse. 

Poetics Today 3(2): 107–156. 

Tahir Gürçağlar, Şehnaz. 2002. What Texts Don’t Tell: 

The Uses of Paratexts in Translation Research. In: 

Hermans, Theo (ed.) Crosscultural Transgressions. 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 38



Research Models in Translation Studies II: Histori-

cal and Ideological Issues. St. Jerome Publishing, 

Manchester, 44–60. 

Taivalkoski-Shilov, Kristiina. 2006. FID and Transla-

tional Progress: Comparing 18th-century and Re-

cent Versions of Henry Fielding’s Novels in French. 

In:  Pekka Tammi and Hannu Tommola (eds.) FREE 

language INDIRECT translation DISCOURSE nar-

ratology: Linguistic, Translatological and Literary-

Theoretical Encounters. Tampere university press, 

Tampere, 135−156.  

Taivalkoski-Shilov, Kristiina. 2010 [1999] When two 

become one: Reported Discourse Viewed through a 

Translatological Perspective. In: ed. by Omid 

Azadibougar (ed.) Translation Effects. Selected Pa-

pers of the CETRA Research Seminar in Translation 

Studies 2009. URL = https://www.arts.ku-

leuven.be/cetra/papers/files/kristiina-taivalkoski-

shilov-when-two-become-one.pdf 

Taivalkoski-Shilov, Kristiina. 2015. Friday in Finnish: 

A Character’s and (Re)translators’ Voices in Six 

Finnish Retranslations of Daniel Defoe’s Robinson 

Crusoe. Target: International Journal of Transla-

tion Studies 27(1): 58–74. 

Tammi, Pekka. 2003. Risky Business: Probing the Bor-

derlines of FID. Nabokov’s An affair of honor 

(Podlec) as a test case. In: Pekka Tammi and Hannu 

Tommola (eds.) Linguistic and Literary Aspects of 

Free Indirect Discourse from a Typological 

Perspective. Publications of the Department of 

Literature and Arts 6, University of Tampere, 

Tampere, 41–54. 

Toral, Antonio, and Andy Way. 2015. Machine-assisted 

translation of literary text: A case study. Translation 

Spaces, 4(2): 240–267.  

Toral, Antonio, and Andy Way. 2018. What level of 

quality can neural machine translation attain on lit-

erary text? Chapter for the forthcoming book Trans-

lation Quality Assessment: From Principles to Prac-

tice. New York: Springer. Retrieved from: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.04962v1 

Wilensky, Robert W. 1978. Understanding Goal-based 

Stories. Yale University Computer Science Research 

Report. 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 39


