












































ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

1 

 

Abstract 

The increase in number and volume of 

electronic documents makes the 

development of applications such as text 

summarization crucial, in order to facilitate 

the task for persons who want to consult 

their documents. The purpose of an 

electronic document summary is the same 

as that of a book abstract; it informs the 

reader about the subject matter. The 

usefulness of the summary is distinguished 

by the limited time devoted to its reading to 

synthesize all the ideas that the author 

wants to spend. 

The objective of this paper is to present our 

SumSAT tool, which is an Arabic text 

summarization system, adopting an 

extraction approach. The originality of our 

work lies in the use of a hybrid 

methodology that combines three methods: 

contextual exploration, indicative 

expression, and graph method. The 

proposed strategy is evaluated by 

comparing the obtained results with human 

summaries using recall and precision 

metrics. 

1 Introduction 

Considered for a long time as one of the main topic 

of natural language processing (Luhn, 1958), Text 

summarization has only grown in importance since 

the late 90s with the proliferation of Internet use 

and the emergence of large amounts of information 

(Maâloul, 2012), which has forced researchers to 

make more effort to make the text summarization 

process more efficient.  This effectiveness is linked 

to two (02) essential factors, on the one side 

reducing the size of the text and on the other side 

keeping the basic idea (or ideas) that are conveyed 

by the text. 

The purpose of this paper is to present SumSAT 

which is a text summarization system developed 

for the Arabic texts. The originality of our work lies 

in making a contribution not only in the pre-

processing phase which consists in preparing the 

text for the summarization process but also in the 

processing phase where we have chosen a hybrid 

strategy that showcases several techniques from 

different approaches. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 

Section 2 will focus on the principle of Text 

summarization. Section 3, briefly describes works 

in the literature that are related to Arabic text 

summarization. Section 4 presents our hybrid 

approach based on contextual exploration, 

Indicative expression and graph method.  Section 

5 introduces the SumSAT tool. The results of 

experiments on the dataset of Arabic are discussed 

in Section 6. Finally, a conclusion that presents the 

assessment of our work associated with 

perspectives and future work. 

2 Text Summarization Between 
Abstraction and Extraction 

There are two very divergent approaches to 

automatically generate summaries (Pai, 2014; 

Munot and Govilkar 2014; Allahyari et al., 2017). 

Summarization based on Abstraction and 

Summarization based on Extraction.; the first one 

(Abstraction approach) comes from the field of 

artificial intelligence and aims to use natural 

language processing techniques (such as semantic 

representation and modification, text 

understanding) to generate a new summary (with 

new words) that covers the main ideas found in the 

SumSAT: Hybrid Arabic Text Summarization Based on  

Symbolic and Numerical Approaches  
 

 

 

Said Moulay Lakhdar and  Mohamed Amine Cheragui 

Mathematics and Computer Science Department 

Ahmed Draia University  

Adrar, Algeria 

moulaylakhdarsaid@yahoo.fr,  m_cheragui@univ-adrar.dz 

 

 

 

mailto:moulaylakhdarsaid@yahoo.fr


ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

2 

 

original text. This production process remains 

relatively difficult to compute, and text generation 

is still very imperfect (Pal and Saha 2014; Zhu et 

al.,2009; D'Avanzo et al., 2004).  

However, in the extraction-based approach, the 

main purpose is to extract the most important or 

significant phrases in the original text and 

combining them to make a summary. Its objective 

is to produce the summary without going through 

deeper analysis, so the main task is to determine 

the relevance of these phrases according to one or 

more criteria (generally a statistical features) 

(Mohamed, 2016; Oufaidaa et al.,2014). 

3 Related Work 

Compared to other languages such as English, 

works on the Arabic language are very few due 

mainly to its morphological and syntactic 

complexity. The table below gives an indication of 

some tools and works done on Arabic text 

summarization (Douzidia and Lapalme, 2004; 

Sobh et al., 2006; Schlesinger et al., 2008; 

Mahmoud et al., 2009; Alotaiby et al., 2012; 

Belguith, 2014; AL-Khawaldeh  and Samawi , 

2015; Belkebir and Guessoum, 2015; Lagrini et 

al., 2017). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 SumSAT's general architecture 

SumSAT is a text summarization system by 

extraction. To generate a summary, our system 

operates in three main steps, which are: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1: General architecture of SumSAT. 

4.1 Step 1: Pre-processing 

This phase is divided into two sub-phases: 

Segmentation: Since the text summarization 

operation consists in selecting relevant phrases, the 

first task to be performed is the segmentation of the 

Tool and 

Work 
Methodology 

LAKHAS 

(Douzidia and 

Lapalme)  

Numerical 

Sentence position 

terms frequency 

title words 

cue words 

Al Sanie Symbolic 
RST (Rhetorical 

Structure Theory) 

Sobh, Ibrahim, 

Nevin 

Darwish, and 

Magda Fayek 

Numerical 

Bayesian 

Genetic 

Programming 

classification 

CLASSY 

(Schlesinger, 

Judith D., 

Dianne P. 

O’leary, and 

John M. 

Conroy)  

Numerical Log-likelihood 

AQBTSS and 

ACBTSS 

(Mahmoud 

O.EI-Haj and 

Bassam H. 

Hammo) 

Numerical TF-IDF 

Table 1:  Summarizing reviewed Works and tools 

(A).  

Tool and 

Work 
Methodology 

Alotaiby, 

Fahad, Salah 

Foda, and 

Ibrahim 

Alkharashi. 

Numerical 

Frequency of non-

stop words 

 Machine 

Learning 

Belghuith Hybrid 
RST  

Machine Learning 

LCEAS (AL-

Khawaldeh 

and Samawi) 

Hybrid 

Based on 

semantic relations  

Roots extraction 

Belkebir and 

Guessoum 
Numerical Machine Learning 

Samira 

Lagrini, 

Mohammed 

Redjimi and 

NabihaAzizi 

Hybrid 
RST 

machine Learning 

Table 2:  Summarizing reviewed Works and tools 

(B).  

 



ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

3 

 

source text into phrases. The method used to divide 

a text is based on the contextual exploration 

method, where the input is a plain text in the form 

of a single text segment. The segmentation starts 

with detecting the presence of indicators, which are 

punctuation marks (« . », « ; », « : », « ! », « ? ».). 

If there is an indicator, segmentation rules will be 

applied to explore the contexts (before and after) to 

ensure that additional indicators are present and 

that certain conditions are met. In the case of an 

end of a phrase, this decision is converted into the 

action of segmentation of the text into two textual 

segments. Thus, and by repeating this operation on 

the resultant segments, we obtain a set of textual 

segments which, placed next to each other, which 

form the input plain text. 

It is important to specify that in our 

segmentation the dot « . » cannot be always 

considered as an indicator of a sentence end; i.e., 

cases like : abbreviation, acronym or a number in 

decimal, where particular rules can be added. 

Stemming: This operation consists of 

transforming, eventually agglutinated or inflected 

word into its canonical form (stem or root) (Roubia 

et al., 2017).  In our case, we need the results of the 

Stemming in the graph method in order to define 

the most important phrases. To generate these 

roots, we use the Full-Text Search technique, 

which allows us to generate the roots of words 

composing the phrases and eliminate the 

stopwords. This technique also generates other 

features such as ranking (rank value) to classify the 

found phrases, in order to filter the relevant ones 

according to their scores. 

4.2 Step 2: Processing  

Since we adopt an extraction approach, the main 

task is to evaluate the phrases, select the most 

relevant ones, then build the summary. We 

adopted a hybrid approach combining three 

methods: the contextual exploration (main 

methods), the indicative expression and graph 

model (secondary methods). The secondary 

methods will scramble on the result of the 

principal method to give better results or provide 

a solution in the case that contextual exploration is 

not efficient. 

Contextual Exploration method: This method 

has been chosen in order to produce a consistent 

summary and to offer users the possibility to 

choose the summary by point of view, where the 

information to be summarized is classified into 

discursive categories. The contextual exploration 

module receives a segmented text as input (the 

result of the segmentation module). The first task 

is to detect the presence of some linguistic 

indicators in each segment. Once an indicator is 

found, all contextual exploration rules related to 

that indicator will be set to find additional clues and 

to verify the conditions required by that rule. If all 

conditions are verified, an annotation action, 

determined by the exploration rule, is performed 

on the segment exactly where the linguistic 

indicator is placed.  

For our SumSAT System, we have defined 13 

discursive categories, each category has its own 

complementary clues (See figure 2). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: The discursive categories defined for 

SumSAT. 

 

Example: The following example illustrates an 

application of our method to select sentences that 

contains information about the discursive category 

"conclusions and results". One of the rules 

associated with this category is as follows: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Example of discursive rule. 

 

The rule, delimited by the tag (<Rule> and 

</Rule>), consists of two parts : 

• Condition part: delimited by (<Conditions> 

and </Conditions>): It groups together 



ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

4 

 

information about the indicator (delimited 

by <Indicator and />) associated with an 

information category, and information about 

the additional clues ( <clue and />) that are 

associated with it. 

• Actions part: delimited by (<Actions> and 

</Actions>): Action to be done, after 

verifying the existence of additional clues 

and the required conditions. 

Where:  

✓ NameRule: the name that identifies the 
rule. 

✓   Task: The task this rule performs since 
contextual exploration can be used for 
annotation and summary generation, as it 
can be used for segmentation. 

✓ Point of View: Represents the category 
name of the information retrieved. 

✓ Search_space: Space or context, where 
the additional clue is located; whether the 
search is done in the phrase itself or in the 
paragraph. 

✓ Value: It is the name of the file where the 
indicators are stored, or the name of the 
file where the clues are stored, associated 
with this category of information. 

✓ Context: Specifies whether the search for 
additional clues should be done before or 
after the indicator. 

Consider the following phrase to be annotated 

(applying the rule mentioned above): 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4: Example of a contextual exploration rule. 

 

In this phrase, it can be said that the 

complementary clue (أن) is present after the 

indicator (أظهرت الدراسات). Therefore, the action to 

be taken is indicated in the actions part (delimited 

by <Actions> and </Actions>); so, this phrase 

assigned the value 'Conclusion' to indicate that it 

contains information concerning a result or 

conclusion. 

Indicative expression: This method is selected 

to offer the possibility of generating a summary of 

a general order, or a specific field; sport, culture, 

economy, etc. This method consists of identifying 

phrases that contain indicators. These indicators 

are determined according to the field of the text to 

be analyzed, and its main task is to identify 

indicators in phrases, neglecting the additional 

clues. Using the following formula: 

 

𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑒(𝑆) =  {
1   𝑖𝑓   𝑆 𝑖𝑠 𝑎𝑛 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟
𝑂                                 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒

       (01) 

 

Graph method: In order to reduce the 

deficiencies of SumSAT's, we have used a hybrid 

approach that integrates a symbolic method (E.C.) 

and numerical methods (graph and indicative 

expression methods). The use of this hybrid 

approach allowed us to offer the user the possibility 

to choose a summary by point of view through 

contextual exploration, as well as the possibility to 

choose a default summary, to cover cases where the 

information is not present in the form of a 

discursive category. 

The generation of the summary, using the graph 

method, consists of selecting the most 

representative phrases of the source text, since it 

attributes to the sentences a relevance score or 

similarity measure by calculating the number of 

intersection terms. These terms are the result of the 

stemming process performed in the pre-processing 

process.  

Suppose that we have a text composed of six 

sentences (P1, P2, P2, ..., P6). After applying 

stemming for each sentence, the total number of 

terms shared with all the others are given in the 

table below: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Modelling this problem for the summary is like 

considering: The document as a graph, the phrases 

as nodes of this graph, the intersections of the 

phrases as edges of this graph, the total number of 

intersecting terms (stems or roots), of a phrase with 

all the others, as a weight of the node representing 

this phrase. Finally, to generate the summary we 

use the Greed algorithm.  

 

 

Phrases P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 

Total number 

of Stems 

(Roots) shared 

with all other 

phrases 

9 8 7 3 6 5 

Table 2:  Phrases Weight.  

 



ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5: Pathway followed using the Greedy 

algorithm. 

4.3 Step 3: Filtering and selection 

The generation of the summary must take into 

consideration the user's requirements, and the 

compression ratio to determine the relevant 

phrases to be selected. The final summary is made 

up of all phrases that fulfill the following 

conditions: 

• Phrases that belong to the discursive 

categories, or to the selected domains 

(chosen by the user) ; 

• And/or the phrases that appear in the list of 

nodes  visited by the graph method (the case 

of the default summary) ; 

• The number of phrases is limited by the 

summary rate, introduced by the user ; 

• The appearance order of the phrases in the 

summary must respect the order of these 

phrases in the source text. 

In order to generate a dynamic summary, a link 

is established between the summary phrases and 

their corresponding phrases in the source text. 

5 Presentation of SumSAT 

SumSAT (Acronym of Summarization System for 

Arabic Text) is a web application system that runs 

at web browsers. Its execution is local to the IIS 

server (Internet Information Server), of Windows. 

The interaction between our system and Microsoft 

SQL Server is done by queries (T-SQL 

transactions).  SumSAT is introduced to the user 

through a GUI, based on HTML5, ASP, C#, and 

Silverlight. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6: GUI Main Menu. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 7: GUI  Generation of Summary. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8: GUI of the Result (summary) 

6 Experimentation and Results 

SumSAT's summary generation is based on a 

hybrid approach where the discursive annotation 

constitutes its main task: the generated summary 

 

 

 P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 

P1 0 0 1 1 1 1 

P2 0 0 1 1 0 1 

P3 1 1 0 0 1 0 

P4 1 1 0 0 0 1 

P5 1 0 1 0 0 1 

P6 1 1 0 1 1 0 

Table 3: Phrase intersection matrix 

 

S2 

9 

8 
S6 

5 

S3 S5 
7 6 

S4 3 

S1 



ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

6 

 

is based on the concept of point of view. Therefore, 

the relevance of a phrase depends on the presence 

of surface linguistic markers characterizing 

(referring to) a discursive category. The evaluation 

of the summary generation process by point of 

view consists of the evaluation of the discursive 

annotation task made by SumSAT. 

The objective of this evaluation is to know the 

percentage of phrases correctly annotated by the 

system, compared to the total number of annotated 

phrases, and compared to the total number of 

manually annotated phrases (reference summary). 

This can be expressed by measuring:   

6.1 The precision rate  

The number of correct discursive categories, 

detected by the system, compared to the total 

number of discursive categories detected by the 

system. 

6.2 The Recall Rate 

The number of correct discursive categories, 

detected by the system, compared to the total 

number of discursive categories presented in the 

reference summary 

The precision and recall rates are calculated as 

follows: 

Precision (%) = (a b⁄ )  ∗  100                       (02) 

 

      Recall (%) = (a c⁄ )  ∗  100                            (03) 

Where :  

• a ∶ Number of automatically assigned correct 
annotations. 

• b∶ Number of automatically assigned 
annotations. 

• c∶ Number of manually assigned correct 
annotations. 

For this purpose, we have set up corpora 

composed of twenty-five texts, and their 

corresponding summaries (The reference 

summaries are manually compiled by two experts). 

For each of the selected texts, we have proceeded 

to the generation of summaries, by discursive 

categories one by one. The evaluation consists of 

applying the metrics, in order to criticize and 

conclude based on the results obtained. 

The results of the calculated rates, as well as the 

precision and recall results, are illustrated in Table 

5, 6 and 7 and by representative graphs (Figure 9, 

10 and 11). These results are calculated for all the 

selected texts in the corpora, and for each of the 

discursive categories adopted by SumSAT. For all 

categories, the precision rate is higher than 66%, 

except for four of them (hypothesis, 

Recapitulation, Reminder, Prediction), which have 

a precision rate between 40% and 50%. Similarly, 

the recall rate is higher than 66%, except for three 

categories that have a recall rate between 30% and 

50% (Prediction, Definition and  Reminder) . This 

shows that SumSAT has promising results which 

can be improved, despite the difficulties of 

generating coherent summaries. 

• Precision rate: These results show that much 

more work needs to be done on refining 

surface markers to maximize this rate. In 

technical terms, it is necessary to work on 

two parameters. The first parameter, related 

to regular expressions, detects discursive 

markers (indicators and additional clues). 

The second parameter, linguistic (the good 

choice of these discursive markers).  

• Recall rate: The results show that the work 

which can contribute to improving these 

results will be linguistic, especially the 

collection of discursive markers in order to 

enrich linguistic resources. 

Note that the obtained results are influenced by 

the divergence of the texts from the point of view 

of style, discursive and argumentative strategies, 

and the covered topic. This means that the surface 

markers, for some categories, are rarely the same 

from one text to another. Similarly, the indicators 

are sometimes weak and cannot refer to a 

discursive category. Moreover, the additional clues 

are sometimes equivocal. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Category Precision (%) Recall (%) 

Objective 73,68 82,35 

hypothesis 42,03 70 

Conclusion 77,78 70 

Explanation 88,57 95,38 

Consequence 77,27 70,83 

Table 3:  SumSAT evaluation using P/R (01).  

 



ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9: Graphical representation of SumSAT's 

evaluation results (01). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 10: Graphical representation of SumSAT's 

evaluation results (02). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 11: Graphical representation of SumSAT's 

evaluation results (03). 

 

7 Conclusion and Continuing Efforts 

In this paper, we have presented SumSAT which is 

an Arabic text summarization system that adopts a 

hybrid approach (i.e: contextual exploration 

method, indicative expression method, and graph 

model method) to build summary.  The work we 

have done has given us an overview of the 

difficulties that we have encountered in the field 

of Arabic text summarization. In pre-processing, 

the incorrect use of punctuation marks (author's 

style) induces segmentation errors, and as a result, 

the relevance of phrases is incorrect, which gives 

an incoherent summary. On the processing phase, 

one of the difficulties met, and which influences 

the performance of the system, is the manual 

search for linguistic markers, to enrich the list of 

discursive categories. This task costs time and 

resources, which has reduced the list of the 

information offered by SumSAT. In addition, we 

found that the representative phrases with a high 

weight may not be selected because of the 

restrictions on the incrementation of the list of 

visited summits when the transition is made only 

between the adjacent ones (Graph model method). 

Based on the obtained results, we propose an 

amelioration of the methods used to generate the 

summary by making a modification, such that the 

glutton algorithm (graph model method) gives the 

advantage to the representative nodes, without 

being limited by the transitions between the 

adjacent summits. Also, the integration of a tool for 

identifying surface linguistic markers in 

documents is a good way to enrich the system's 

linguistic resources.  

Category Precision (%) Recall (%) 

Definition 66,67 32,67 

Confirmation 97,5 82,98 

Problematic 66,67 66,67 

Reminder 50 44,02 

Recapitulation 50 88,24 

Table 4:  SumSAT evaluation using P/R (02).  

 

Category Precision (%) Recall (%) 

Author, Title & 

Subtitle 
91,94 91,94 

Thematic 85,71 66,67 

Prediction 50 50 

Finding & opinion 90 69,26 

Enunciation 94,94 91,85 

Table 5:  SumSAT evaluation using P/R (03).  

 



ACL 2019 Submission ***. Confidential review Copy. DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. 

8 

 

References  

Allahyari Mehdi , Pouriyeh Seyedamin ,  Assefi 

Mehdi, Safaei Saeid , Trippe D. Elizabeth, Gutierrez 

B.Juan and Kochut Krys. 2017. Text Summarization 

Techniques: A Brief Survey. In Proceedings of arXiv. 

rXiv:1707.02268. 

Alkhawaldeh Fatima Taha and Samawi W. Venus. 

2015. Lexical cohesion and entailment based 

segmentation for arabic text summarization (lceas). 

The World of Computer Science and Information 

Technology Journal. (WSCIT)5 (3): 51-60.  

Alotaiby Fahad, Foda Salah and Alkharashi Ibrahim. 

2012. New approaches to automatic headline 

generation for Arabic documents. Journal of 

Engineering and Computer Innovations. Vol. 3(1), 

pp. 11-25. 

Belguith Lamia Hadrich. 2014. Automatic 

summarization. Natural Language Processing of 

Semitic Languages. Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg.371-408.  

Belkebir Riadh. and Guessoum Ahmed. 2015. A 

supervised approach to arabic text summarization 

using adaboost. New Contributions in Information 

Systems and Technologies. Springer International 

Publishing. 227-236. 

D'Avanzo Ernesto, Magnini Bernardo and Vallin 

Alessandro. 2004. Keyphrase Extraction for 

Summarization Purposes: The LAKE System at 

DUC-2004. In Proceedings of the 2004 Document 

Understanding Conference (DUC2004), Boston, 

MA.    

Douzidia Fouad Sofiane and Lapalme Guy. 2004. 

Lakhas, an Arabic Summarization System. In 

Proceedings of the 2004 Document Understanding 

Conference (DUC2004), Boston, MA.   

Lagrini Samira, Redjimi Mohamme and Azizi Nabiha. 

2017. Extractive Arabic Text Summarization 

Approaches. In Proceeding of the 6th International 

Conference, ICALP 2017, Fez, Morocco. 

Luhn Hans Peter. 1958. The automatic creation of 

literature abstracts. IBM Journal of Research and 

Development, Volume 2 Issue 2. 

Maâloul Mohame Hedi. 2012. Approche hybride pour 

le résumé automatique de textes. Application à la 

langue arabe.  thesis doctorat, University Aix-

Marseille.   

Mahmoud El hadj, Kruschwitz Udo  and Fox Chris. 

2009. Experimenting with automatic text 

summarisation for Arabic.  Language and 

Technology Conference. Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg. 490-499.  

Mohamed Ashraf Ali. 2016. Automatic summarization 

of the Arabic documents using NMF: A preliminary 

study. In Proceedings of the 11th International 

Conference on Computer Engineering & Systems 

(ICCES). Egypt 

Munot Nikita and Govilkar S. Sharvari. 2014 . 

Comparative Study of Text Summarization Methods. 

International Journal of Computer Applications. 

Volume 102–No.12. 

Oufaida Houda., Noualib Omar and Blache Philippe. 

2014. Minimum redundancy and maximum 

relevance for single and multi-document Arabic text 

summarization. Journal of King Saud University - 

Computer and Information Sciences, Volume 26, 

Issue 4. 

Pal Alok Ranjan and Saha Diganta. 2014. An Approach 

to Automatic Text Summarization using WordNet. In 

Proceedings of the 4th Advance Computing 

Conference (IACC),  Page(s): 1169 – 1173. India 

Pai Anusha. 2014. Text Summarizer Using Abstractive 

and Extractive Method. International Journal of 

Engineering Research & Technology, Vol. 3 Issue 5. 

Rouibia Rima., Belhadj Imane. & Cheragui Mohamed 

Amine. 2017. JIDR: Towards building hybrid Arabic 

stemmer. In Proceeding of the 1st IEEE 

International Conference on Mathematics and 

Information Technology (ICMIT). Adrar. Algeria. 

Schlesinger D. Judith , O’Leary P. Dianne and Conroy 

M. John 2008. Arabic/English multi-document 

summarization with CLASSY—the past and the 

future. In Proceedings  of the International 

Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and 

Computational Linguistics. Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg. 568-581,  

Sobh Ibrahim , Darwish Nevin Mahmoud , Fayek 

Magda B. 2006. An Optimized Dual Classification 

System for Arabic Extractive Generic Text 

Summarization. Available at: http://www.rdi-

eg.com/rdi/technologies/papers.htm.  

Zhu Junyan, Wang Can, He Xiaofei, Bu Jiajun, Chen 

Cun, Shang Shujie, Qu Mingcheng and Lu Gang. 

2009. Tagoriented document summarization. In 

Proceedings of the 18th  International Conference 

on World Wide Web, WWW ’09, ACM, New York, 

NY, USA.  

https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Allahyari%2C+M
https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Pouriyeh%2C+S
https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Assefi%2C+M
https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Assefi%2C+M
https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Safaei%2C+S
https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Trippe%2C+E+D
https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Gutierrez%2C+J+B
https://arxiv.org/search/cs?searchtype=author&query=Kochut%2C+K
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Fatima_Alkhawaldeh?_sg=2uoiO_nla6plrcluFN_6PyPK5R3Sr6GfsNeac08kmMJSWOh0yroB8PK0nehawUTMBp7hx0o.XDNhuxKN9u3jPN1yZwxRkWBL0q0jguUEkfRIQ9jr4qGM50Nz5td_5_FhvRnFh-79DaQ72shURRxUQKG9XHIBdw
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Venus_Samawi?_sg=2uoiO_nla6plrcluFN_6PyPK5R3Sr6GfsNeac08kmMJSWOh0yroB8PK0nehawUTMBp7hx0o.XDNhuxKN9u3jPN1yZwxRkWBL0q0jguUEkfRIQ9jr4qGM50Nz5td_5_FhvRnFh-79DaQ72shURRxUQKG9XHIBdw
https://www.semanticscholar.org/author/Ibrahim-Sobh/143995880
https://www.semanticscholar.org/author/Nevin-Mahmoud-Darwish/2378404
https://www.semanticscholar.org/author/Magda-B.-Fayek/2223085
http://www.rdi-eg.com/rdi/technologies/
http://www.rdi-eg.com/rdi/technologies/

