




































 Abstract 

The MICE project (2018 – 2020) will de-
liver a middleware layer for improving the 
output quality of the eTranslation system 
of the European Commission’s Connect-
ing Europe Facility, through additional 
services, such as domain adaptation and 
named-entity recognition. It will also de-
liver a user portal, allowing for human 
post-editing. 

1 Objectives 
The MICE project (Middleware for Customised 
eTranslation), which is funded by the CEF 
Telecom programme (Connecting Europe 
Facility) and runs from October 2018 to 
September 2020, delivers a middleware layer for 
the improvement of the eTranslation machine 
translation (MT) system. The latter is developed 
by the Directorate-General for Translation (DGT), 
supports all 24 official EU languages, and is 
provided by the CEF Automated Translation 
building block of the Directorate-General for 
Communications Networks, Content and 
Technology (DG CNECT), as a service to digital 
service infrastructures (DSIs) of the European 

                                                
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 
CCBY-ND. 

Commission (EC) and to public administrations of 
Member States. The project consortium of MICE 
consists of two companies, CrossLang 
(coordinator) and Tilde, and two public 
organisations, NBN (Bureau for Standardisation, 
Belgium) and RIK (Centre of Registers and 
Information Systems, Estonia). 

The middleware layer consists of the following 
services: 
• domain adaptation; 
• terminology resolution; 
• named-entity recognition; 
• document filtering; 
• normalisation. 
MICE will also provide a human and automated 
post-editing (PE) environment for CEF eTransla-
tion output. This will help users to dynamically 
improve the MT output and aggregate data for fur-
ther system improvement. 

The tests in the project involve four languages, 
i.e. English, Dutch, French and Estonian, and two 
domains, i.e. standards and e-Business/e-Land1 
register information, in two countries (Belgium 
and Estonia). Domain-specific neural MT systems 
will be made available by the project consortium. 

1 e-Land registers are electronic land registries that 
register the ownership of land and property.  

MICE 

Joachim Van den Bogaert,  
Heidi Depraetere, Tom Vanallemeersch, 
Frederic Everaert, Koen Van Winckel 

CrossLang 
Kerkstraat 106 

9050 Gentbrugge 
Belgium 

{first.lastname}@crosslang.com 
 

Artūrs Vasiļevskis, Valters Sics 
Tilde IT 

Naugarduko g. 100 
LT-03160 Vilnius 

Latvia 
{first.lastname}@tilde.lt 

Katri Tammsaar, Ingmar Vali,  
Tambet Artma, Piret Saartee,  

Laura Katariina Teder 
RIK 

Lubja 4 
19081, Tallinn 

Estonia 
{first.lastname}@rik.ee 

 
Johan Haelterman, David Bienfait 

Bureau for Standardisation 
Rue Joseph II 40 PO box 6 

1000, Brussels 
Belgium 

{first.lastname}@nbn.be 
 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 116



2 Architecture 
MICE will expose its middleware layer for 
customisation through APIs and a user portal, in 
order to increase its impact and usability. Tasks 
will be performed in real-time or offline, 
depending on user preference. The input consists 
of text snippets (messages in plain text of 
maximally 5,000 characters) or full-text 
documents (Microsoft Office, open document 
formats, etc.). The security level will be compliant 
with the Electronic Simple European Networked 
Services (e-SENS). 
The MICE project will create a reference 
implementation for the automated translation of 
standards and e-Business/e-Land register 
information in Belgium and Estonia, and be 
extensible to allow for future add-ons of MT-
related services, such as automated domain 
detection or combination of MT systems. 

The architecture (outlined in Figure 1) will in-
corporate the open source MateCat2 computer 
aided translation (CAT) tool to provide user portal 
functionality (user interface and configuration 
management).  

Existing integrations for translation memory 
(TM) leveraging, MT and post-editing outsourc-
ing will be abstracted into service endpoints that 
can be connected to external services. For exam-
ple: 
• The TM endpoint will allow for connecting 

MateCat to any TM server. Exports can be 
                                                
2 See https://github.com/matecat/MateCat 

added to the European Language Resource 
Coordination repository. 

• The MT + annotations endpoint will allow for 
connectivity with the CEF eTranslation ser-
vice (or any other third-party MT service) 
while integrating advanced features, such as 
named-entity recognition. 

• The outsourcing endpoint will allow for dis-
patching post-editing jobs to third-party pro-
viders. 

While developing the MICE solution, existing 
interfaces will be upgraded to allow for advanced 
MT/TM features:  
• The existing MT interface will be extended to 

encode annotations information, instructing 
MT engines to apply a distinct treatment to 
named entities, detected terms, etc. 

• The TM interface will be adapted to allow for 
the storage of post-editing triplets. Currently, 
most TMs only store the source and target 
sentence. By storing also the MT hypothesis, 
instead of overwriting it with the human trans-
lation, MICE will contribute to the develop-
ment of corpora for the training of quality es-
timation and automated post-editing systems. 

Acknowledgement 

MICE is funded by the European Commis-
sion ’s CEF Telecom programme (project 2017-
EU-IA-0169). 

Figure 1: MICE architecture 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 117


