




































Workflows for kickstarting RBMT in virtually No-Resource Situation

Tommi A Pirinen
Universität Hamburg,

Hamburger Zentrum für Sprachkorpora
Max-Brauer-Allee 60, Hamburg

tommi.antero.pirinen@uni-hamburg.de

Abstract

In this article we describe a work-in-
progress best learnt practices on how
to start working on rule-based machine
translation when working with lan-
guage that has virtually no pre-existing
digital resources for NLP use. We use
Karelian language as a case study, in
the beginning of our project there were
no publically available corpora, paral-
lel or monolingual analysed, no anal-
ysers and no translation tools or lan-
guage models. We show workflows that
we have find useful to curate and de-
velop necessary NLP resources for the
language. Our workflow is aimed also
for no-resources working in a sense of
no funding and scarce access to native
informants, we show that building core
NLP resources in parallel can alleviate
the problems therein.

1 Introduction
A lot of research goes into working with
low-resource situation, however, in context of
large international conferences today, loww-
resources can mean anything from having mil-
lions and millions of lines of parallel corpus1 to
“anything except English”. For this work we
consider the lowest-resourced languages in the
group of languages we work with, namely those
having virtually no widely known publicly ac-
cessible or available resources at the start of
© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a
Creative Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, at-
tribution, CC-BY-ND.
1http://www.statmt.org/wmt19/
parallel-corpus-filtering.html

our project, and for which we aim to search, cu-
rate and create the necessary resources. This
is a work-in-progress, but we believe we have
already gathered enough promising results to
give some best recommended practices on how
to start working on a language seemingly lack-
ing all natural language processing (NLP) re-
sources.

For the machine translation part we are
working on doing a rule-based machine trans-
lation (RBMT) and specifically one between
a minority language (Karelian) and a closely
related more-resourced language (Finnish), in
the first phase. The translator is bidirectional,
i.e. we translate both Finnish to Karelian and
vice versa. The work for majority language
machine translations (e.g. English and Rus-
sian) is reserved for the future after some re-
sources have been built. We have chosen this
for a number of reasons, firstly the task is much
easier when working with a related language
than a typologically unrelated one, and sec-
ondly there is a body of good results using
RBMT of closely related in further resource
building, for example for Spanish-related lan-
guages in the Wikipedia content translation.

The article is organised as follows, first in
Section 2 we describe the background and ra-
tionale for this project, in Section 3 we describe
our approach and methodology for RBMT
building, in Section 4 we describe our results
so far and finally in the Section 5 we discuss
findings and lay out future work.

2 Background
One of the problems, we have identified in the
past in building NLP resources for minority
languages, is that same or similar work ends up

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 11



doing multiple times between different schol-
ars, or even within a single project of same
minority language. This is not very ideal sit-
uation, when resources like native informants
or skilled scholars are scarce. A typical ex-
ample might be that a documentary linguis-
tics effort builds a corpus of annotated texts,
that includes hand annotated linguistic anal-
ysis, glosses and translations, while computa-
tional linguists build a morphological analyser,
treebank and machine translator by hand from
scratch as well. What we aim to achieve is
synergy between these two different research
practices.

The technological methodology used in this
project is based on following:

• The rule-based machine translation is pro-
vided by apertium (Forcada et al., 2011).

• The morphological analyser-generator is
based on the HFST engine (Lindén et al.,
2009)

• The morphological disambiguation is
based on Constraint Grammar (Karlsson,
1990)

• annotation format is based on Universal
dependencies (Nivre et al., 2019)

This article describes what is still a work-in-
progress, at this stage we are evaluating how
the approach is and if we should make a project
in building the supporting software for the
methodology and language resource building.
That is to say we have the workflows in place
and the supporting software is built as we pro-
ceed with the project. Some of the workflows
described here have been previously tested in
building larger well-resourced machine transla-
tors, for example in (Pirinen, 2018). Based on
experiences of this project, we could estimate
that the effort needed is around 20,000 lines
annotated and translated to get a comparable
results as out of the box neural system (Piri-
nen, 2019), this is however a result achieved on
two unrelated languages both of which aren’t
English, so results on related non-English lan-
guages may be different.

We have selected to use a rule-based ap-
proach to machine-translation for this project.
Since rule-based approaches have somewhat

fallen out of popularity in recent years, it needs
strong arguments to select this approach in
favour of others. For this purpose we have a
check-list for which languages are to be used
with which approaches first:

• Closely related languages: Finnish and
Karelian are very closely related languages

• Lack of Parallel resources: Karelian has
virtually zero digital resources

• Existence of written grammars: We have
number of grammars to help (Zaikov,
2013)

One of the reasons we started to develop an
approach to language resource creation that
can produce multiple language resources fast,
is that we have prior experience in 1. building
computational linguistic resources like mor-
phological analysers from the scratch without
considering the corpus creation or documen-
tary linguistics and 2. building language doc-
umentation corpora from the scratch without
considering creation of dictionaries. The ideal
result of this project is to develop a method
that empowers computational linguists to work
on their preferred form of language documen-
tation and corpus creation and makes use of
the expert work put in. This can always be
achieved afterhands by scraping the produced
corpora or data, but our plan is to introduce
that as a part of workflow.

For other projects that have aimed to
achieve similar goals, many are related to other
rule-based machine translation efforts within
the free/open source rule-based machine trans-
lation community, e.g.(?). On larger scale
in the NLP community there have been sev-
eral attempts to make computational linguists
and documentary linguists work together to-
wards common goal in this manner, for exam-
ple (Maxwell and David, 2008; Blokland et al.,
2015)

The basis of this RBMT system between
Karelian and Finnish is that we also have
a large coverage stable Finnish system al-
ready available (Pirinen, 2015). Karelian on
the other hand has no resources, and is de-
scribed by the ethnologuy as threatened2. We
could have also tested an unrelated language
2https://www.ethnologue.com/language/krl

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 12



with large coverage dictionary, for example
Russian-Karelian would be useful for the tar-
get audience, or build a machine translation
between two under-resourced closely related
languages, like Karelian and Livvi, which is
a closely related language with slightly more
resources than Karelian but much less than
Finnish.

Finally, for social and political reasons, there
is a growing interest in Karelian language and
culture, and while there is a number of projects
on the linguistic aspects and language learning,
there is a lack of language technology-based
projects in the field. Our aim is to fill that
hole.

2.1 Languages
The language we use a case study is Karelian, a
minority Uralic language spoken mainly in Re-
public of Karelia in Russia and in Finland. It
is closely related to Finnish, Livvi and Ludic,
but they are not mutually intelligible for an in-
dividual without at least some linguistic train-
ing. The naming of different languages and
varieties related to Karelian is often confusing,
what we aim to describe here is in line of ISO
639–3 language code krl; see the number 1 in
the map in Figure 13 for the geographic dis-
tribution. For the machine translation task, in
first phase we build a Karelian—Finnish trans-
lator.

3 Workflow

The workflow that we have reached at this
point of the project is a synthesis of tradi-
tional workflow in documentary linguistics and
workflows in building corpora and analyser
writing, specifically in traditional rule-based
systems. In documentational linguistics we
have drawn experience and inspiration from
SIL Fieldworks Explorer (FLeX) and the rule-
based workflows are loosely based in tradition
of Finite State Morphology.

The first part of the workflow is acquir-
ing corpora, which for unresourced minority
is relatively difficult task, at the beginning of
our project we aimed to use web-as-corpus ap-
proach. During categorising the downloaded
data into languages we found also a corpus
3https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:
Map_of_Karelian_dialects.png

Figure 1: Map of Karelian languages, the number 1 is
Karelian that we study in this article, numbers 2 and
3 are closely related languages that are in some liter-
ature refered to as Karelian as well, but are separate
languages and do not belong under the krl language
code in ISO standard.

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 13



Figure 2: A UML-style chart of the annotation and
translation process

repository with a free to use open source com-
patible licencing policy4, which on top of ex-
pert made language classification has the ad-
vantage that we can keep full documents in-
stead of shuffled sentences.

The actual corpus building workflow consists
of two parts that can be alternated between,
annotation and lexicon building. With anno-
tation, we can work on any of the following
tasks: lemmatising and pos tagging, morpho-
logical analysis, syntactic treebanking and ma-
chine translation. On the other side lexicon
building we build the morphological lexicon for
a finite-state analyser, and a bilingual lexicon
for rule-based machine translation. A UML-
style graph of the process is shown in figure 2.

The main contribution of this workflow is
that both of the tasks feed into the other task,
that is annotated corpora can be immediately
used for entry generation of the lexicons, and
the analysers and machine translators built
from the lexicons are used to generate n-best
lists from which annotators can choose the an-
notations.

We provide a real world example here: An
annotator starts working on a new document
that contains sentences: “Pelih ošallistu 13
henkie” (13 people participated in the play)
the annotator annotates in UD format:
1 peliin peli NOUN Number=Sing|Case=Ill 2 obl _ _
2 ošallistu ošallistuo VERB Number=Sing|Tense=Pres 0 root _ _
3 13 13 NUM Number=Sing|NumType=Card 4 nummod _ _
4 henkie henki NOUN Number=Sing|Case=Par 2 nsubj _ _

and provides Finnish translation like “Peliin
osallistui 13 henkilöä”. The annotation is used
to generate entries for monolingual dictionary
of Karelian, i.e. peli<n>, ošallistuo<vblex>,
4http://dictorpus.krc.karelia.ru/en/corpus/text

Tokens Sentences
Annotations 3094 228
Translations 1144 161

Table 1: The size of Karelian—Finnish corpus at the
time of writing.

13<num>, and henki<n>, the lexicon writer
can simply fill in the necessary informations
to inflect the words properly. The entries
can likewise be generated to bilingual dic-
tionary, if 1:1 translation match to exist-
ing target language analyses is trivial, we
get peli<n>:peli<n> etc. among the sug-
gested entries. Now, when the annotator
gets back to annotating and translating the
next sentences of the document and runs into:
“Pelissä ”tapettih” šamoin Ilmarini” (Ilmari-
nen was also killed in the game), the first token
“Pelissä” has suggested annotation peli NOUN
Number=Sing|Case=Ine as well as suggested
translation.

4 Results
In a short time we have managed to build a
rule-based machine translation system. We de-
tail the system in Table 1. The corpus built so
far in this proto-typing phase of the project
has been built by one expert annotator, work-
ing on spare time for three months in other
words in only handful of work hours.

At the current moment we do not have
enough bilingual corpora to measure the trans-
lation quality yet but we hope to include a
BLEU and WER evaluations of the translation
quality by the time we submit a camera-ready
version of the paper.

The corpora will be released on github via
the Apertium project for the translations and
possibly also disambiguated corpora, and via
Universal dependencies project for the anno-
tated corpus. Both retain the CC BY licence
of the original raw text data. The dictionaries
and analysers are also released via the Aper-
tium using the GNU General Public Licence.

5 Concluding remarks
We have found that we can rapidly build a solid
base of natural language resourcses suitable for
rule-based machine translation and we aim to
extend the approach to more Uralic languages

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 14



in near future. Furthermore the approach pro-
totyped in this paper has been found very mo-
tivating and nice to work with in the future
we will look at building a more approachable
graphical user interface for it.

The approach we describe here is espe-
cially suitable in no-resources starting situa-
tion, even a limited amount of resources will
open more workflows, more technical possibil-
ities to aid in the initial part of the corpus
building and resource building. However, we
still think this approach may be useful as a
part of balanced corpus building approach in a
research project for any lesser researched lan-
guage.

One of the things that we are looking for-
ward to is to test the advances in neural meth-
ods in very low resource situation, (Neubig and
Hu, 2018)5this would be particularly suitable
for Karelian-to-Finnish direction as Finnish is
well-resourced.

References
Blokland, Rogier, Marina Fedina, Ciprian Ger-

stenberger, Niko Partanen, Michael Rießler, and
Joshua Wilbur. 2015. Language documentation
meets language technology. In Septentrio Con-
ference Series, number 2, pages 8–18.

Forcada, Mikel L, Mireia Ginestí-Rosell, Jacob
Nordfalk, Jim O’Regan, Sergio Ortiz-Rojas,
Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Felipe Sánchez-
Martínez, Gema Ramírez-Sánchez, and Fran-
cis M Tyers. 2011. Apertium: a free/open-
source platform for rule-based machine transla-
tion. Machine translation, 25(2):127–144.

Karlsson, Fred. 1990. Constraint grammar as a
framework for parsing unrestricted text. In Karl-
gren, H., editor, Proceedings of the 13th Interna-
tional Conference of Computational Linguistics,
volume 3, pages 168–173, Helsinki.

Lindén, Krister, Miikka Silfverberg, and Tommi
Pirinen. 2009. Hfst tools for morphology—an
efficient open-source package for construction of
morphological analyzers. In Mahlow, Cerstin
and Michael Piotrowski, editors, sfcm 2009, vol-
ume 41 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 28—47. Springer.

Maxwell, Michael and Anne David. 2008. Joint
grammar development by linguists and computer

5We thank the anonymous reviewers for bringing this
line of work to our attention

scientists. In Workshop on NLP for Less Privi-
leged Languages, Third International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, pages
27–34, Hyderabad, India.

Neubig, Graham and Junjie Hu. 2018. Rapid
adaptation of neural machine translation to new
languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04189.

Nivre, Joakim, Mitchell Abrams, Željko Agić,
Lars Ahrenberg, Gabrielė Aleksandravičiūtė,
Lene Antonsen, Katya Aplonova, Maria Je-
sus Aranzabe, Gashaw Arutie, Masayuki Asa-
hara, Luma Ateyah, Mohammed Attia, Aitz-
iber Atutxa, Liesbeth Augustinus, Elena Bad-
maeva, Miguel Ballesteros, Esha Banerjee, Se-
bastian Bank, Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Vic-
toria Basmov, John Bauer, Sandra Bellato,
Kepa Bengoetxea, Yevgeni Berzak, Irshad Ah-
mad Bhat, Riyaz Ahmad Bhat, Erica Bi-
agetti, Eckhard Bick, Agnė Bielinskienė, Ro-
gier Blokland, Victoria Bobicev, Loïc Boizou,
Emanuel Borges Völker, Carl Börstell, Cristina
Bosco, Gosse Bouma, Sam Bowman, Adriane
Boyd, Kristina Brokaitė, Aljoscha Burchardt,
Marie Candito, Bernard Caron, Gauthier Caron,
Gülşen Cebiroğlu Eryiğit, Flavio Massimiliano
Cecchini, Giuseppe G. A. Celano, Slavomír
Čéplö, Savas Cetin, Fabricio Chalub, Jinho
Choi, Yongseok Cho, Jayeol Chun, Silvie
Cinková, Aurélie Collomb, Çağrı Çöltekin,
Miriam Connor, Marine Courtin, Elizabeth
Davidson, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Vale-
ria de Paiva, Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Carly
Dickerson, Bamba Dione, Peter Dirix, Kaja
Dobrovoljc, Timothy Dozat, Kira Droganova,
Puneet Dwivedi, Hanne Eckhoff, Marhaba Eli,
Ali Elkahky, Binyam Ephrem, Tomaž Erjavec,
Aline Etienne, Richárd Farkas, Hector Fernan-
dez Alcalde, Jennifer Foster, Cláudia Freitas,
Kazunori Fujita, Katarína Gajdošová, Daniel
Galbraith, Marcos Garcia, Moa Gärdenfors,
Sebastian Garza, Kim Gerdes, Filip Ginter,
Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola, Memduh Gökır-
mak, Yoav Goldberg, Xavier Gómez Guino-
vart, Berta González Saavedra, Matias Grioni,
Normunds Grūzītis, Bruno Guillaume, Céline
Guillot-Barbance, Nizar Habash, Jan Hajič, Jan
Hajič jr., Linh Hà Mỹ, Na-Rae Han, Kim Har-
ris, Dag Haug, Johannes Heinecke, Felix Hennig,
Barbora Hladká, Jaroslava Hlaváčová, Florinel
Hociung, Petter Hohle, Jena Hwang, Takumi
Ikeda, Radu Ion, Elena Irimia, Ọlájídé Ishola,
Tomáš Jelínek, Anders Johannsen, Fredrik Jør-
gensen, Hüner Kaşıkara, Andre Kaasen, Sylvain
Kahane, Hiroshi Kanayama, Jenna Kanerva,
Boris Katz, Tolga Kayadelen, Jessica Kenney,
Václava Kettnerová, Jesse Kirchner, Arne Köhn,
Kamil Kopacewicz, Natalia Kotsyba, Jolanta
Kovalevskaitė, Simon Krek, Sookyoung Kwak,
Veronika Laippala, Lorenzo Lambertino, Lucia
Lam, Tatiana Lando, Septina Dian Larasati,
Alexei Lavrentiev, John Lee, Phương Lê Hồng,
Alessandro Lenci, Saran Lertpradit, Herman

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 15



Leung, Cheuk Ying Li, Josie Li, Keying Li,
KyungTae Lim, Yuan Li, Nikola Ljubešić, Olga
Loginova, Olga Lyashevskaya, Teresa Lynn,
Vivien Macketanz, Aibek Makazhanov, Michael
Mandl, Christopher Manning, Ruli Manurung,
Cătălina Mărănduc, David Mareček, Katrin
Marheinecke, Héctor Martínez Alonso, André
Martins, Jan Mašek, Yuji Matsumoto, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Gustavo Mendonça, Niko Miekka, Mar-
garita Misirpashayeva, Anna Missilä, Cătălin
Mititelu, Yusuke Miyao, Simonetta Monte-
magni, Amir More, Laura Moreno Romero,
Keiko Sophie Mori, Tomohiko Morioka, Shin-
suke Mori, Shigeki Moro, Bjartur Mortensen,
Bohdan Moskalevskyi, Kadri Muischnek, Yugo
Murawaki, Kaili Müürisep, Pinkey Nain-
wani, Juan Ignacio Navarro Horñiacek, Anna
Nedoluzhko, Gunta Nešpore-Bērzkalne, Lương
Nguyễn Thị, Huyền Nguyễn Thị Minh, Yoshi-
hiro Nikaido, Vitaly Nikolaev, Rattima Ni-
tisaroj, Hanna Nurmi, Stina Ojala, Adédayọ̀
Olúòkun, Mai Omura, Petya Osenova, Robert
Östling, Lilja Øvrelid, Niko Partanen, Elena
Pascual, Marco Passarotti, Agnieszka Pate-
juk, Guilherme Paulino-Passos, Angelika Peljak-
Łapińska, Siyao Peng, Cenel-Augusto Perez,
Guy Perrier, Daria Petrova, Slav Petrov, Jussi
Piitulainen, Tommi A Pirinen, Emily Pitler,
Barbara Plank, Thierry Poibeau, Martin Popel,
Lauma Pretkalniņa, Sophie Prévost, Prokopis
Prokopidis, Adam Przepiórkowski, Tiina Puo-
lakainen, Sampo Pyysalo, Andriela Rääbis,
Alexandre Rademaker, Loganathan Ramasamy,
Taraka Rama, Carlos Ramisch, Vinit Ravis-
hankar, Livy Real, Siva Reddy, Georg Rehm,
Michael Rießler, Erika Rimkutė, Larissa Rinaldi,
Laura Rituma, Luisa Rocha, Mykhailo Roma-
nenko, Rudolf Rosa, Davide Rovati, Valentin
Roșca, Olga Rudina, Jack Rueter, Shoval Sadde,
Benoît Sagot, Shadi Saleh, Alessio Salomoni,
Tanja Samardžić, Stephanie Samson, Manuela
Sanguinetti, Abigail Walsh Sarah McGuinness,
Dage Särg, Baiba Saulīte, Yanin Sawanaku-
nanon, Nathan Schneider, Sebastian Schuster,
Djamé Seddah, Wolfgang Seeker, Mojgan Ser-
aji, Mo Shen, Atsuko Shimada, Hiroyuki Shi-
rasu, Muh Shohibussirri, Dmitry Sichinava, Na-
talia Silveira, Maria Simi, Radu Simionescu,
Katalin Simkó, Mária Šimková, Kiril Simov,
Aaron Smith, Isabela Soares-Bastos, Carolyn
Spadine, Antonio Stella, Milan Straka, Jana Str-
nadová, Alane Suhr, Umut Sulubacak, Shingo
Suzuki, Zsolt Szántó, Dima Taji, Yuta Taka-
hashi, Fabio Tamburini, Takaaki Tanaka, Is-
abelle Tellier, Guillaume Thomas, Liisi Torga,
Trond Trosterud, Anna Trukhina, Reut Tsar-
faty, Francis Tyers, Sumire Uematsu, Zdeňka
Urešová, Larraitz Uria, Hans Uszkoreit, Sowmya
Vajjala, Daniel van Niekerk, Gertjan van No-
ord, Viktor Varga, Eric Villemonte de la Clerg-
erie, Veronika Vincze, Lars Wallin, Jing Xian
Wang, Jonathan North Washington, Maximilan
Wendt, Seyi Williams, Mats Wirén, Christian

Wittern, Tsegay Woldemariam, Tak-sum Wong,
Alina Wróblewska, Mary Yako, Naoki Yamazaki,
Chunxiao Yan, Koichi Yasuoka, Marat M.
Yavrumyan, Zhuoran Yu, Zdeněk Žabokrtský,
Amir Zeldes, Daniel Zeman, Manying Zhang,
and Hanzhi Zhu. 2019. Universal dependen-
cies 2.4. LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at
the Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
(ÚFAL), Faculty of Mathematics and Physics,
Charles University.

Pirinen, Tommi A. 2015. Development and use of
computational morphology of finnish in the open
source and open science era: Notes on experi-
ences with omorfi development. SKY Journal of
Linguistics, 28.

Pirinen, Tommi A. 2018. Rule-based machine-
translation between finnish and german.

Pirinen, Tommi A. 2019. Neural and rule-based
finnish nlp models—expectations, experiments
and experiences. In Proceedings of the Fifth
International Workshop on Computational Lin-
guistics for Uralic Languages, pages 104–114.

Zaikov, Pekka. 2013. Vienankarjalan kielioppi.

LoResMT 2019 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 16


