



















































"My Way of Telling a Story": Persona based Grounded Story Generation


Proceedings of the Second Storytelling Workshop, pages 11–21
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

11

“My Way of Telling a Story”: Persona based Grounded Story Generation

Khyathi Raghavi Chandu ∗, Shrimai Prabhumoye ∗,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Alan W Black

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

{kchandu, sprabhum, rsalakhu, awb}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Visual storytelling is the task of generating sto-
ries based on a sequence of images. Inspired
by the recent works in neural generation focus-
ing on controlling the form of text, this paper
explores the idea of generating these stories in
different personas. However, one of the main
challenges of performing this task is the lack
of a dataset of visual stories in different per-
sonas. Having said that, there are independent
datasets for both visual storytelling and anno-
tated sentences for various persona. In this pa-
per we describe an approach to overcome this
by getting labelled persona data from a differ-
ent task and leveraging those annotations to
perform persona based story generation. We
inspect various ways of incorporating person-
ality in both the encoder and the decoder repre-
sentations to steer the generation in the target
direction. To this end, we propose five models
which are incremental extensions to the base-
line model to perform the task at hand. In our
experiments we use five different personas to
guide the generation process. We find that the
models based on our hypotheses perform bet-
ter at capturing words while generating stories
in the target persona.

1 Introduction

Storytelling through pictures has been dated back
to prehistoric times – around 30,000 years ago,
paintings of herds of animals like bisons, rhinos
and gazelles were made in a cave in Southern
France. However, these were not merely paintings,
they were stories about the heroic adventures of
humans. Since then visual storytelling has evolved
from paintings to photography to motion pictures
to video games. With respect to its timeline, neural

∗Both authors contributed equally to this work.

generative storytelling has gained traction only re-
cently. Recent research has focused on challenges
in generating longer documents (Wiseman et al.,
2017; Lau and Baldwin, 2016) as well as on pre-
dicting the next events in the story (Martin et al.,
2018). Contemporary research has focused on us-
ing deep generative models to capture high-level
plots and structures in stories (Fan et al., 2018).
Recent years have also seen some work hinging
on the event structures and scripts (Mostafazadeh
et al., 2016; Rishes et al., 2013; Peng et al., 2018).
Generating an appropriate ending of a story was
also studied by Guan et al. (2018) and Sharma
et al. (2018). Research on generating stories from
a sequence of images is anew (Peng et al., 2018;
Lukin et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2018; Hsu et al.,
2018; Gonzalez-Rico and Fuentes-Pineda, 2018).

Cavazza et al. (2009) have stressed the impor-
tance of expressing emotions in the believability
of the automated storytelling system. Adapting
a personality trait hence becomes crucial to cap-
ture and maintain interest of the audience. Asso-
ciating the narrative to a personality instigates a
sense of empathy and relatedness. Although there
has been research in generating persona based di-
alog responses and generating stylistic sentences
(Shuster et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2018; Prabhumoye
et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2017), generating persona
based stories with different personality types nar-
rating them has been unexplored. In this paper, we
focus on generating a story from a sequence of im-
ages as if the agent belongs to a particular person-
ality type. In specific, we choose to perform exper-
imentations on visual story telling (Huang et al.,
2016).

This paper introduces a novel approach to gen-
erating visual stories in five different personality
types. A key challenge to this end is the lack



12

of large scale persona annotated stories. We ad-
dress this by transferring knowledge from anno-
tated data in dialog domain to the storytelling do-
main. We base our visual story generator model
on Kim et al. (2018) and propose multiple tech-
niques to induce the personalities in the latent rep-
resentations of both the encoder and the decoder.
The goal of our work is to learn the mapping be-
tween the latent representations of the images and
the tokens of the story such that we encourage our
generative model to generate tokens of a particu-
lar personality. We evaluate our generative models
using the automatic metric of ROUGE (Lin, 2004)
which takes into account the sentence level sim-
ilarity in structure and thus roughly evaluates the
matching of content. We acknowledge that there is
a drop in this metric since our model is not trying
to optimize generation alone but also adapt per-
sonality from a different dataset.

We also evaluate the success of generating the
story in the target personality type using automatic
and qualitative analysis. The automatic metrics
comprise of the classification accuracies rooted
from the annotated data. We observe that one of
the proposed models (LEPC, described in Section
3 performs slightly better at classification accura-
cies for most of the personas while retaining simi-
lar ROUGE scores.

The main contribution of this paper is showing
simple yet effective approaches to narrative visual
stories in different personality types. The paper
also displays an effective way of using annotated
data in the dialog domain to guide the generative
models to a specified target personality.

2 Related Work

Visual Story Telling: Last decade witnessed
enormous interest in research at the intersec-
tion of multiple modalities, especially vision and
language. Mature efforts in image captioning
(Hossain et al., 2019) paved way into more ad-
vanced tasks like visual question answering (Wu
et al., 2017) and visual dialog (Das et al., 2017) ,
(Mostafazadeh et al., 2017). As an obvious next
step from single shot image captioning lies the
task of describing a sequence of images which are
related to one another to form a story like nar-
rative. This task was introduced as visual story
telling by Huang et al. (2016), differentiating de-

scriptions of images in isolation (image captions)
and stories in sequences. The baseline model that
we are leveraging to generate personality condi-
tioned story generation is based on the model pro-
posed by Kim et al. (2018) for the visual story
telling challenge. Another simple yet effective
technique is late fusion model by Smilevski et al.
(2018). In addition to static images, Gella et al.
(2018) have also collected a dataset of describ-
ing stories from videos uploaded on social media.
Chandu et al. (2019) recently introduced a dataset
for generating textual cooking recipes from a se-
quence of images and proposed two models to in-
corporate structure in procedural text generation
from images.

Style Transfer: One line of research that is
closely related to our task is style transfer in text.
Recently generative models have gained popular-
ity in attempting to solve style transfer in text with
non-parallel data (Hu et al., 2017; Shen et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2018). Some of this work has also
focused on transferring author attributes (Prabhu-
moye et al., 2018), transferring multiple attributes
(Lample et al., 2019; Logeswaran et al., 2018)
and collecting parallel dataset for formality (Rao
and Tetreault, 2018). Although our work can be
viewed as another facet of style transfer, we have
strong grounding of the stories in the sequence of
images.

Persona Based Dialog: Persona based genera-
tion of responses has been studied by NLP com-
munity in dialog domain. (Li et al., 2016) en-
coded personas of individuals in contextualized
embeddings that capture the background informa-
tion and style to maintain consistency in the re-
sponses given. The embeddings for the speaker
information are learnt jointly with the word em-
beddings. Following this work, (Zhou et al., 2018)
proposed Emotional Chatting Machine that gener-
ates responses in an emotional tone in addition to
conditioning the content. The key difference be-
tween former and latter work is that the latter cap-
tures dynamic change in emotion as the conversa-
tion proceeds, while the user persona remains the
same in the former case. (Zhang et al., 2018) re-
lease a huge dataset of conversations conditioned
on the persona of the two people interacting. This
work shows that conditioning on the profile infor-



13

mation improves the dialogues which is measured
by next utterance prediction. In these works, the
gold value of the target response was known. For
our work, we do not have gold values of stories in
different personas. Hence we leverage annotated
data from a different task and transfer that knowl-
edge to steer our generation process.

Multimodal domain: With the interplay be-
tween visual and textual modalities, an obvious
downstream application for persona based text
generation is image captioning. Chandrasekaran
et al. (2018) worked on generating witty captions
for images by both retrieving and generating with
an encoder-decoder architecture. This work used
external resources to gather a list of words that
are related to puns from web which the decoder
attempts to generate conditioned on phonological
similarity. Wang and Wen (2015) studied the sta-
tistical correlation of words associated with spe-
cific memes. These ideas have also recently pen-
etrated into visual dialog setting. Shuster et al.
(2018) have collected a grounded conversational
dataset with 202k dialogs where humans are asked
to portray a personality in the collection process.
They have also set up various baselines with dif-
ferent techniques to fuse the modalities including
multimodal sum combiner and multimodal atten-
tion combiner. We use this dataset to learn per-
sonas which are adapted to our storytelling model.

3 Models

We have a dataset of visual stories S =
{S1, . . . ,Sn}. Each story Si is a set of sequence
of five images and the corresponding text of the
story Si = {(I(1)i ,x

(1)
i ), . . . , (I

(5)
i ,x

(5)
i )}. Our

task is to generate the story based on not only the
sequence of the images but also closely follow-
ing the narrative style of a personality type. We
have five personality types (described in Section
4) P = {p1, . . . ,p5} and each story is assigned
one of these five personalities as their target per-
sona. Here, each pi represents the one-hot encod-
ing of the target personality for story i.e p1 =
[1, 0, 0, 0, 0] and so on till p5 = [0, 0, 0, 0, 1].
Hence, we create a dataset such that for each story,
we also have a specified target personality type
Si = {(I(1)i ,x

(1)
i ), . . . , (I

(5)
i ,x

(5)
i );pi}. The in-

puts to our models are the sequence of images and

the target personality type. We build generative
models such that they are able to generate stories
in the specified target personality type from the
images. In this section, we first briefly describe
classifiers that are trained discriminatively to iden-
tify each of the personalities and then move on to
the story generation models that make use of these
classifiers.

Here is an overview of the differences in the six
models that we describe next.

1. The baseline model (Glocal) is a sequence
to sequence model with global and local
contexts for generating story sentence corre-
sponding to each image.

2. The Multitask Personality Prediction (MPP)
model is equipped with predicting the per-
sonality in addition to generating the sen-
tences of the story. This model also incor-
porates binary encoding of personality.

3. The Latent Encoding of Personality in Con-
text (LEPC) model incorporates an embed-
ding of the personality as opposed to binary
encoding.

4. The Latent Encoding of Personality in De-
coder (LEPD) model augments personality
embedding at each step in the decoder, where
each step generates a token.

5. Stripped Encoding of Personality in Context
(SEPC) is similar to LEPC but encodes per-
sonality embedding after stripping the mean
of the story representation.

6. Stripped Encoding of Personality in Decoder
(SEPD) is similar to LEPD but encodes per-
sonality embedding after stripping the mean
of the story representation. This is similar to
the intuition behind SEPC.

3.1 Classification

We use convolutional neural network (CNN) ar-
chitecture to train our classifiers. We train five
separate binary classifiers for each of the person-
ality types. The classifiers are trained to predict
whether a sentence belongs to a particular person-
ality or not. We train the classifiers in a supervised
manner. We need labeled data to train each of the
classifiers. Each sample of text x in the respective



14

datasets of each of the five personality types has
a label in the set {0, 1}. Let θpjC denote the pa-
rameters of the classifier for personality pj where
j ∈ {1, . . . , 5}. Each classifier is trained with the
following objective:

L(θpjC ) = EX [log qC(pj |x)] (1)

We use cross entropy loss to calculate LpjC for
each of the five classifiers. The classifiers accept
continuous representations of tokens as input.

3.2 Story Generation

We present five extensions to incorporate person-
ality based features in the generation of stories.

(1) Baseline model (Glocal): We first describe
the baseline model that is used for visual story
telling. This is based on the model (Kim et al.,
2018) that attained better scores on human evalua-
tion metrics. It follows an encoder-decoder frame-
work translating a sequence of images into a story.
From here on, we refer to this model as glocal
through the rest of the paper owing to the global
and local features in the generation of story se-
quence at each step (described in this section).

The image features for each of the steps are ex-
tracted with a ResNet-152 (He et al., 2016) post
resizing to 224 X 224. The features are taken from
the penultimate layer of this pretrained model and
the gradients are not propagated through this layer
during optimization. These features are passed
through a fully connected layer to obtain the fi-
nal image features. In order to obtain an over-
all context of the story, the sequence of the im-
age features are passed through a Bi-LSTM. This
represents the global context of the story. For each
step in the generation of the story, the local context
corresponding to the specificity of that particular
image is obtained by augmenting the image fea-
tures (local context) to the context features from
the Bi-LSTM (global context). These glocal fea-
tures are used to decode the story sentence at each
step. This concludes the encoder part of the story.
The decoder of each step in the story also uses an
LSTM which takes the same glocal feature for that
particular step at each time step. Hence there are
5 glocal features feeding into each time step in the
decoder.

For simplicity in understanding, we use the fol-

lowing notations throughout model descriptions to
represent mathematical formulation of the genera-
tion models. Subscript k indicates the kth step or
sentence in a story. Subscript i indicates the ith

story example. The story encoder is represented
as Encoder which comprises of the features ex-
tracted from the penultimate layer of ResNet-152
concatenated with the global context features from
the Bi-LSTM. The entirety of this representation
in encoder and the glocal features obtained is rep-
resented using zk for the kth step or sentence in
the story.

zk = Encoder(Ik) (2)

Now, the generation of a sentence in the story is
represented as follows:

x̂k ∼
∏
t

Pr(x̂tk|x̂<tk , zk) (3)

The generated sentence x̂k is obtained from
each of the output words x̂tk which is generated
by conditioning on all of the prior words x̂<tk and
the glocal feature obtained as zk.

Personality based Generation: In the rest of
the section, we are going to describe the incremen-
tal extensions to the baseline to adapt the model to
perform persona based story generation.

(2) Multitask Personality Prediction (MPP):
The intuition behind the hypothesis here is to pro-
vide the personality information to the model and
also enable it to predict the personality along with
the generation of the story. The obvious extension
to provide personality information is to incorpo-
rate the one-hot encoding pi ∈ P of the five per-
sonas in the context before the decoder. The visual
story telling data is split into five predetermined
personalities as described in Section 4. For each
story, the corresponding personality is encoded in
a one hot representation and is augmented to the
glocal context features. These features are then
given to the decoder to produce each step in the
story. The model is enabled to perform two tasks:
the primary task is to generate the story and the
secondary task is to predict the personality of the
story. The classifiers described in Section 3.1 are
used to perform personality prediction. Formally,



15

the generation process is represented by:

x̂k ∼
∏
t

Pr(x̂tk|x̂<tk , zk,pi) (4)

Here, we condition the generation of each word
on the glocal context features zk, binary encoding
of the personality pi and the words generated till
that point.

The cross entropy loss for generation is Lg and
the loss for the prediction of each of the personal-
ities is L

pj
C given by Eq 1. The overall loss opti-

mized for this model is:

Ltotal = α ·Lg +
(1− α)

5
·

5∑
j=1

LpjC

The overall model is optimized on this total
loss. We use cross entropy loss for each of the
individual losses. We give a higher weight α to
the story generation and equally distribute the re-
maining (1−α) among each of the 5 personalities.

(3) Latent Encoding of Personality in Context
(LEPC): This model is an incremental improve-
ment over MPP model. The key difference is the
incorporation of personality as an embedding that
captures more centralized traits in the words be-
longing to that particular personality. For each of
the five personality types, we have a latent repre-
sentation of the personality (P), as opposed to the
binary encoding in MPP model. Similar to the ear-
lier setting, this average personality feature vector
is concatenated with the glocal context vector The
generation step is formally represented as:

x̂k ∼
∏
t

Pr(x̂tk|x̂<tk , [zk;P ],pi) (5)

This means that zk is concatenated with P to
give personality informed representation; and the
generation of each word is conditioned on these
concatenated features zk, binary encoding of the
personality pi and the words generated so far.

(4) Latent Encoding of Personality in Decoder
(LEPD): Instead of augmenting the personality
traits to the context as done in LEPC model, they
could be explicitly used in each step of decoding.
The latent representation of the personality (P) is
concatenated with the word embedding for each

time step in the decoder.

x̂k ∼
∏
t

Pr(x̂tk|[x̂<tk ;P ], zk,pi) (6)

The generation of each of the words is condi-
tioned on the words generated so far that are al-
ready concatenated with the average vector for the
corresponding personality, and the glocal features
along with the binary encoding of the personality.

(5) Stripped Encoding of Personality in Con-
text (SEPC): In order to orient the generation
more towards the personality, we need to go be-
yond simple augmentation of personality. Deriv-
ing motivation from neural storytelling1, we use
a similar approach to subtract central characteris-
tics of words in a story and add the characteristics
of the personality. Along the same lines of cal-
culating an average representation for each of the
personalities, we also obtain an average represen-
tation of the story S. This average representation
S intuitively captures the style of the story. Es-
sentially, the story style is being stripped off the
context and personality style is incorporated. The
modified glocal feature that is given to the decoder
is obtained as m = zk − S + P . The genera-
tion process is now conditioned on m instead of
zk. Hence, the generation of each word in decod-
ing is conditioned on the words generated so far
(x̂<tk ), the binary encoding of the personality (pi)
and the modified representation of the context fea-
tures (m).

x̂k ∼
∏
t

Pr(x̂tk|x̂<tk ,m,pi) (7)

Here, note that the context features obtained
thus far are from the visual data and performing
this operation is attempting to associate the visual
data with the central textual representations of the
personalities and the stories.

(6) Stripped Encoding of Personality in De-
coder (SEPD): This model is similar to SEPC
with the modification of performing the stripping
at each word embedding in the decoder as opposed
to the context level stripping. The time steps to
strip features is at the sentence level in SEPC and
is at word level in SEPD model. The LSTM based

1https://github.com/ryankiros/
neural-storyteller

https://github.com/ryankiros/neural-storyteller
https://github.com/ryankiros/neural-storyteller


16

decoder decodes one word at a time. At each of
these time steps, the word embedding feature E is
modified as ek = E − S + P . This modification
is performed in each step of the decoding process.
These modified features are used to generate each
sentence in the full story. The model is trained to
generate a sentence in the story as described be-
low:

x̂k ∼
∏
t

Pr(x̂tk|e<tk , zk,pi) (8)

The generation of each word is conditioned on
the modified word embeddings using the afore-
mentioned transformation (e<tk ), the binary encod-
ings of the personalities (pi) and the glocal context
features.

4 Datasets

Coalescing the segments of personality and se-
quential generation together, our task is to gen-
erate a grounded sequential story from the view
of a personality. To bring this to action, we de-
scribe the two sources of data we use to generate
personality based stories in this section. The first
source of data is focussed on generic story gener-
ation from a sequence of images and the second
source of data includes annotations for personal-
ity types for sentences. We tailor a composition of
these two sources to obtain a dataset for person-
ality based visual storytelling. Here, we note that
the techniques described above can be applied for
unimodal story generation as well.

Visual Story Telling: Visual Storytelling is the
task of generating stories from a sequence of im-
ages. A dataset for this grounded sequential gen-
eration problem was collected by Huang et al.
(2016) and an effort for a shared task 2 was led
in 2018. The dataset includes 40,155 training se-
quences of stories. It comprises of a sequence
of images, descriptions of images in isolation and
stories of images in sequences. We randomly di-
vide the dataset into 5 segments (comprising of
8031 stories each) and each segment is associated
with a personality.

Personality Dialog: Shuster et al. (2018) have
provided a dataset of 401k dialog utterances, each

2http://visionandlanguage.net/
workshop2018/index.html#challenge

of which belong to one of 215 different person-
alities. The dataset was collected through image
grounded human-human conversations. Humans
were asked to play the role of a given personality.
This makes this dataset very pertinent for our task
as it was collected through engaging image chat
between two humans enacting their personalities.

For our task, we wanted to choose a set of
five distinct personality types. Let the set of ut-
terances that belong to each personality type be
Up = {u1p, . . . , unp} where p ∈ {1, . . . , 215}.
We first calculate the pooled BERT representation
(Devlin et al., 2018) of each of the utterances. To
get the representation of the personality P , we
simply average the BERT representations of all the
utterances that belong to that personality. The rep-
resentation of each personality is given by:

Pp =
Σnk=1BERT (u

k
p)

n
(9)

This representation is calculated only on the train
set of (Shuster et al., 2018).

Since our goal is to pick five most distinct per-
sonality types, we have the daunting task of fil-
tering the 215 personality types to 5. To make
our task easier we want to group similar personal-
ities together. Hence, we use K-Means Clustering
to cluster the representations of the personalities
into 40 clusters 3. We get well formed and mean-
ingful clusters which look like [Impersonal, Aloof
(Detached, Distant), Apathetic (Uncaring, Disin-
terested), Blunt, Cold, Stiff]; [Practical, Ratio-
nal, Realistic, Businesslike]; [Empathetic, Sympa-
thetic, Emotional]; [Calm, Gentle, Peaceful, Re-
laxed, Mellow (Soothing, Sweet)] etc. We then
build a classifier using the technique described in
Section 3.1 to classify the utterances to belong to
one of the 40 clusters. We pick the top five clus-
ters that give the highest accuracy for the 40-way
classification.

The five personality clusters selected are:

• Cluster 1 (C1): Arrogant, Conceited, Ego-
centric, Lazy, Money-minded, Narcissistic,
Pompous and Resentful

• Cluster 2 (C2): Skeptical and Paranoid
3We do not perform exhaustive search on the number of

clusters. We tried k values of 5, 20 and 40 and selected 40 as
the ideal value based on manual inspection of the clusters.

http://visionandlanguage.net/workshop2018/index.html#challenge
http://visionandlanguage.net/workshop2018/index.html#challenge


17

• Cluster 3 (C3): Energetic, Enthusiastic, Ex-
citing, Happy, Vivacious, Excitable

• Cluster 4 (C4): Bland and Uncreative

• Cluster 5 (C5): Patriotic

We build five separate classifiers, one for each
personality cluster. Note that these clusters are
also associated with personalities and hence are
later referred as P followed by the cluster id in the
following sections. To build the five binary clas-
sifiers, we create label balanced datasets for each
cluster i.e we randomly select as many negative
samples from the remaining 4 clusters as there are
positive samples in that cluster. We use the train,
dev and test split as is from (Shuster et al., 2018).
The dataset statistics for each of the five clusters is
provided in Table 1.

Cluster Type Train Dev Test
Cluster 1 26538 1132 2294
Cluster 2 6614 266 608
Cluster 3 19784 898 1646
Cluster 4 6646 266 576
Cluster 5 3262 138 314

Table 1: Statistics of data belonging to each of the per-
sona clusters

Note that all the datasets have a balanced dis-
tribution of labels 0 and 1. For our experiments
it does not matter that distribution of the number
of samples is different because we build separate
classifiers for each of the cluster and their output
is treated as independent from one another.

As seen in Table 2, all the classifiers attain good
accuracies and F-scores on the test set.

C1 C2 C3 C4 C5
Acc. 79.12 81.09 83.17 77.95 84.08
F1 0.79 0.81 0.83 0.78 0.84

Table 2: Performance of classifiers for each of the per-
sona clusters

We finally calculate the representation P for
each of the five clusters and the representation S
of stories using equation 9. Note that S is calcu-
lated over the visual story tellind dataset. These
representations are used by our generative models
LEPC, LEPD, SEPC, and SEPD.

5 Experiments and Results

This section presents the experimental setup for
the models described in Section 3. Each of the
models are incremental extensions over the base-
line glocal model. The hyperparameters used for
this are as follows.

Hyperparameters: The hidden size of the Bi-
LSTM encoder of the story to capture context
is 1024. The dimensionality of the glocal con-
text vector zk is 2048. A dropout layer of 50%
is applied post the fully connected layer to ob-
tain the image features and after the global fea-
tures obtained from Bi-LSTM which is 2 layered.
The word embedding dimension used is 256. The
learning rate is 1e-3 with a weight decay of 1e-
5. Adam optimizer is used with batch normaliza-
tion and a momentum of 0.01. Weighting the loss
functions differently is done to penalize the model
more if the decoding is at fault as compared to not
predicting the personality of the story. α is set to
0.5 and each of the individual personality losses
are weighted by a factor of 0.1.

The rest of the 5 models use the same hyperpa-
rameter setting with an exception to word embed-
ding dimension. The average personality (P) and
the average story (S) representations are obtained
from pre-trained BERT model.Hence this is a 768
dimensional vector. In order to perform the strip-
ping of the story feature and adding the personality
features to the word embeddings in the decoder,
the word embedding dimension is matched to 768
in the SEPD model.

Model C1 C2 C3 C4 C5
Glocal 69.90 73.29 51.55 34.91 65.86
MPP 69.35 72.44 47.54 33.83 58.49
LEPC 70.10 73.24 52.13 34.59 66.42
LEPD 76.44 79.20 33.71 34.02 67.13
SEPC 76.76 77.00 32.84 44.53 60.08
SEPD 78.14 79.44 31.33 34.99 73.88

Table 3: Performance (in terms of accuracy) of gener-
ated stories to capture persona

5.1 Quantitative Results

We perform two sets of experiments: (1) evalu-
ating the performance of the models on capturing
the personalities in the story and (2) performance



18

Original grandma loves when 
all the kids come over 
to visit .

she will pick them 
them up and put them 
on her lap even 
though it <unk> .

the kids love each 
other as well giving 
lots of hugs and love .

grandma can not 
forget her little girl and 
gives her some love 
as well .

grandpa says it 's 
time for cake .

Glocal the family is having a 
great time .

they are playing with 
each other .

he is happy to see his 
grandson .

she is being silly the birthday girl is 
eating a cake .

MPP [ male ] and his 
friends are having a 
great time .

they are all smiles for 
the camera .

everyone is enjoying 
their new family .

[ female ] is so excited 
to be there .

she is very happy 
about her birthday .

LEPC the family was having 
a great time .

they were so happy to 
be together .

they were having a 
good time with 
grandson .

she was very excited 
to play with a kid .

he was surprised by 
all of his friends .

LEPD the family was ready 
to see a lot of a party .

they had a great time . they were having a lot 
of fun .

we had a great day . he was happy to eat 
cake .

SEPC the parade was very 
beautiful .

there were a lot of 
people there .

we were so happy to 
be a great time .

i had a great time . this was a picture of 
a little girl .

SEPD the family is a great 
time .

it was a lot of a big . there were a lot . i had a picture . they were a very .

Figure 1: Comparison of generated stories from all the described models.

Model ROUGE L
Glocal 0.1805
MPP 0.1713
LEPC 0.1814
LEPD 0.1731
SEPC 0.1665
SEPD 0.1689

Table 4: ROUGE L scores for the generated stories by
each of our models

of story generation. The former evaluation is per-
formed using the pre-trained classifiers (3.1) on
the personality dataset. We calculate the classi-
fication accuracy of the generated stories of the
test set for the desired target personality. How-
ever, we need to note that the classification error
of the models trained is reflected in this result as
well. This evaluation is done at a sentence level
i.e accuracy is calculated over each sentence of the
story (each sentence of the story has the same tar-
get personality as that of the entire story). The
performance of the generation is evaluated using

the ROUGE score 4. Although this captures the
generic aspect of generation, the metric explicitly
does not evaluate whether the story is generated
on a conditioned personality. In future, we would
also like to look at automatic evaluation of the gen-
erated stories with respect to incorporation of per-
sonalities.

Table 3 shows the results of classification ac-
curacy for each of the five personalities. Table 4
shows the results of ROUGE L evaluation. We ac-
knowledge that there would be a deviation to this
automatic score since optimizing the gold standard
generation of story from training data is not our
end goal. Rather our models make use of two dis-
tinct datasets and learn to transfer the traits anno-
tated in personality dialog dataset into the visual
story telling dataset.

Despite this, we notice that LEPC model gives
comparative results to that of the glocal model in
terms of story generation. It is noticed that LEPC

4We use the implementation from https://github.
com/Maluuba/nlg-eval

https://github.com/Maluuba/nlg-eval
https://github.com/Maluuba/nlg-eval


19

model also gives slight improvement on the clas-
sification accuracies for most of the clusters (each
cluster representing a personality). However this
is an insufficient result to generalize that incorpo-
rating personality at context level performs bet-
ter than that at the word level since the inverted
stance is observed in SEPC and SEPD models. We
plan to investigate this further by performing ab-
lations and examine which operation is causing
these models to perform weakly. Note that the
SEPC model performs the best in incorporating
personality in three of the five personality types.
But this model takes a hit in the automatic score.
This is because our generative models are dealing
with competing losses or reconstruction of classi-
fication.

5.2 Qualitative Results

We present an example of the story generated by
each of the models proposed in Figure 1. This
example belongs to persona in cluster C3. The
words corresponding to this cluster are highlighted
with blue color in the persona conditioned gen-
eration of the stories. The main observation is
that all of the five sentences in the story contain
a word relevant to happiness for each of the MPP,
LEPC and LEPD models. SEPC and SEPD mod-
els capture these happiness features in only two
and one sentences respectively. The glocal model
does not cater explicitly to the personality while
our proposed models attempt to capture the per-
sona tone in generation. This is observed in the
fourth generated sentence in the sequence by each
of our proposed models. While the glocal model
uses the word ‘silly’, our models capture the tone
and generate ‘excited’ and ‘great’. Similarly for
the fifth sentence, MPP, LEPC and LEPD gener-
ate ‘happy’, ‘surprised’ and ‘happy’ respectively.

It is observed that in most generated stories,
the language model has taken a rough hit in the
SEPD model. This is also substantiated in Fig-
ure 1. This seems to be due to stripping away the
essential word embedding features that contribute
to linguistic priors or language model. This could
be potentially corrected by retaining the word em-
bedding feature as is and augmenting it with the
stripped features. Having presented these results,
we notice that there is a significant scope for im-
proving the generation of the story while capturing

high level persona traits in generation.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Automatic storytelling is a creative writing task
that has long been the dream of text generation
models. The voice conveying this story is the nar-
rative style and this can be attributed to different
personalities, moods, situations etc. In the case
of persona based visual storytelling, this voice not
only is aware of the grounded content to be con-
veyed in the images, but also has a model to steer
the words in the narrative to characterize the per-
sona.

A key challenge here is that there is no targeted
data for this specific task. Hence we leverage
annotations of persona from an external persona
based dialog dataset and apply it on the visual sto-
rytelling dataset. We address this task of attribu-
tion of a personality while generating a grounded
story by simple techniques of incorporating per-
sona information in our encoder-decoder archi-
tecture. We propose five simple incremental ex-
tensions to the baseline model that captures the
personality. Quantitatively, our results show that
the LEPC model is improving upon the accuracy
while at the same time not dropping the automatic
scores. We also observe that the persona induced
models are generating at least one word per sen-
tence in the story that belong to that particular per-
sona. While automatically evaluating this can be
tricky, we adapt a classification based evaluation
of whether the generated output belongs to the per-
sona class or not. In the future, we hope to also
perform human evaluations for measuring both the
target personality type of the generated and story
and its coherence.

There is yet a lot of scope in incorporating the
persona in the word embeddings. This is an on-
going work and we plan on investigating the rela-
tively poor ROUGE performance of the SEPC and
SEPD models and rectify them by equipping them
with language model information. We also plan to
work towards a stable evaluation protocol for this
task in the future.

References
Marc Cavazza, David Pizzi, Fred Charles, Thurid Vogt,

and Elisabeth André. 2009. Emotional input for



20

character-based interactive storytelling. In Proceed-
ings of The 8th International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume
1, pages 313–320. International Foundation for Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.

Arjun Chandrasekaran, Devi Parikh, and Mohit Bansal.
2018. Punny captions: Witty wordplay in image de-
scriptions. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pages 770–775.

Khyathi Chandu, Alan W Black, and Eric Nyberg.
2019. Storyboarding of recipes: Grounded contex-
tual generation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Florence, Italy. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, Khushi Gupta, Avi
Singh, Deshraj Yadav, José MF Moura, Devi Parikh,
and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Visual dialog. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, volume 2.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.

Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018.
Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceed-
ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 889–898.

Zhenxin Fu, Xiaoye Tan, Nanyun Peng, Dongyan
Zhao, and Rui Yan. 2018. Style transfer in text:
Exploration and evaluation. In Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Spandana Gella, Mike Lewis, and Marcus Rohrbach.
2018. A dataset for telling the stories of social media
videos. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 968–974.

Diana Gonzalez-Rico and Gibran Fuentes-Pineda.
2018. Contextualize, show and tell: a neural visual
storyteller. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00738.

Jian Guan, Yansen Wang, and Minlie Huang. 2018.
Story ending generation with incremental encod-
ing and commonsense knowledge. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.10113.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–
778.

MD Hossain, Ferdous Sohel, Mohd Fairuz Shiratuddin,
and Hamid Laga. 2019. A comprehensive survey of
deep learning for image captioning. ACM Comput-
ing Surveys (CSUR), 51(6):118.

Chao-Chun Hsu, Szu-Min Chen, Ming-Hsun Hsieh,
and Lun-Wei Ku. 2018. Using inter-sentence di-
verse beam search to reduce redundancy in visual
storytelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11867.

Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. 2017. Toward con-
trolled generation of text. In Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning-
Volume 70, pages 1587–1596. JMLR. org.

Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang, Francis Ferraro, Nasrin
Mostafazadeh, Ishan Misra, Aishwarya Agrawal, Ja-
cob Devlin, Ross Girshick, Xiaodong He, Pushmeet
Kohli, Dhruv Batra, et al. 2016. Visual storytelling.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 1233–1239.

Taehyeong Kim, Min-Oh Heo, Seonil Son, Kyoung-
Wha Park, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. 2018. Glac
net: Glocal attention cascading networks for multi-
image cued story generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.10973.

Guillaume Lample, Sandeep Subramanian, Eric Smith,
Ludovic Denoyer, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Y-
Lan Boureau. 2019. Multiple-attribute text rewrit-
ing. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.

Jey Han Lau and Timothy Baldwin. 2016. An em-
pirical evaluation of doc2vec with practical insights
into document embedding generation. ACL 2016,
page 78.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Georgios Sp-
ithourakis, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2016. A
persona-based neural conversation model. In Pro-
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 994–1003.

Juncen Li, Robin Jia, He He, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Delete, retrieve, generate: a simple approach to sen-
timent and style transfer. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers),
pages 1865–1874.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. Text Summarization
Branches Out.

Lajanugen Logeswaran, Honglak Lee, and Samy Ben-
gio. 2018. Content preserving text generation with
attribute controls. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pages 5103–5113.

Stephanie Lukin, Reginald Hobbs, and Clare Voss.
2018. A pipeline for creative visual storytelling. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Storytelling,
pages 20–32.

https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1g2NhC5KQ
https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1g2NhC5KQ


21

Lara J Martin, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Xinyu Wang,
William Hancock, Shruti Singh, Brent Harrison, and
Mark O Riedl. 2018. Event representations for au-
tomated story generation with deep neural nets. In
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Chris Brockett, Bill Dolan,
Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, Georgios P Sp-
ithourakis, and Lucy Vanderwende. 2017. Image-
grounded conversations: Multimodal context for
natural question and response generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.08251.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Alyson Grealish, Nathanael
Chambers, James Allen, and Lucy Vanderwende.
2016. Caters: Causal and temporal relation scheme
for semantic annotation of event structures. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Events, pages
51–61.

Nanyun Peng, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Jonathan May,
and Kevin Knight. 2018. Towards controllable story
generation. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Storytelling, pages 43–49.

Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yulia Tsvetkov, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Alan W Black. 2018. Style
transfer through back-translation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 866–876.

Sudha Rao and Joel Tetreault. 2018. Dear sir or
madam, may i introduce the gyafc dataset: Corpus,
benchmarks and metrics for formality style transfer.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 129–140.

Elena Rishes, Stephanie M Lukin, David K Elson, and
Marilyn A Walker. 2013. Generating different story
tellings from semantic representations of narrative.
In International Conference on Interactive Digital
Storytelling, pages 192–204. Springer.

Rishi Sharma, James Allen, Omid Bakhshandeh, and
Nasrin Mostafazadeh. 2018. Tackling the story end-
ing biases in the story cloze test. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
volume 2, pages 752–757.

Tianxiao Shen, Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
Jaakkola. 2017. Style transfer from non-parallel text
by cross-alignment. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, pages 6830–6841.

Kurt Shuster, Samuel Humeau, Antoine Bordes, and
Jason Weston. 2018. Engaging image chat: Model-
ing personality in grounded dialogue. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.00945.

Marko Smilevski, Ilija Lalkovski, and Gjorgi
Madzarov. 2018. Stories for images-in-sequence
by using visual and narrative components. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.05622.

William Yang Wang and Miaomiao Wen. 2015. I
can has cheezburger? a nonparanormal approach to
combining textual and visual information for pre-
dicting and generating popular meme descriptions.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 355–365.

Sam Wiseman, Stuart Shieber, and Alexander Rush.
2017. Challenges in data-to-document generation.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2253–2263.

Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Peng Wang, Chunhua Shen,
Anthony Dick, and Anton van den Hengel. 2017.
Visual question answering: A survey of methods and
datasets. Computer Vision and Image Understand-
ing, 163:21–40.

Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Per-
sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you
have pets too? arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.07243.

Hao Zhou, Minlie Huang, Tianyang Zhang, Xiaoyan
Zhu, and Bing Liu. 2018. Emotional chatting ma-
chine: Emotional conversation generation with in-
ternal and external memory. In Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.


