











































Tracing Antisemitic Language Through Diachronic Embedding Projections: France 1789-1914


Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Computational Approaches to Historical Language Change, pages 115–125
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

115

Tracing Antisemitic Language Through Diachronic Embedding
Projections: France 1789-1914

Rocco Tripodi Massimo Warglien Simon Levis Sullam Deborah Paci
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice

{rocco.tripodi, warglien, levissmn, deborah.paci}@unive.it

Abstract

We investigate some aspects of the history of
antisemitism in France, one of the cradles of
modern antisemitism, using diachronic word
embeddings. We constructed a large corpus of
French books and periodicals issues that con-
tain a keyword related to Jews and performed
a diachronic word embedding over the 1789-
1914 period. We studied the changes over
time in the semantic spaces of 4 target words
and performed embedding projections over 6
streams of antisemitic discourse. This allowed
us to track the evolution of antisemitic bias in
the religious, economic, socio-politic, racial,
ethic and conspiratorial domains. Projections
show a trend of growing antisemitism, espe-
cially in the years starting in the mid-80s and
culminating in the Dreyfus affair. Our analysis
also allows us to highlight the peculiar adverse
bias towards Judaism in the broader context of
other religions.

1 Introduction

Word embeddings are widely used in many Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. They pro-
vide a machine-interpretable representation of lex-
ical features. Their effectiveness in representing
words semantics consists essentially in the abil-
ity of learning association patterns in the training
dataset. For this reason the learned representations
contain human-like biases (Caliskan et al., 2017).
These biases can be detected easily and can be re-
lated to gender, ethic or racial aspects (Garg et al.,
2018; Voigt et al., 2017).

Since the use of word embedding is ubiquitous
in many commercial products such as search en-
gines and machine translators, the research com-
munity has introduced different techniques to de-
bias them (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Zhao et al.,
2018), especially under the gender dimension.
Despite these efforts debiasing word embeddings

seems to be harder than expected. In fact, while
Bolukbasi et al. (2016) and Zhao et al. (2018)
demonstrated that it is possible to debias specific
gendered-words, even after the debiasing proce-
dure, the geometry of the embeddings remains
almost the same with respect to non gendered-
words (Gonen and Goldberg, 2019), preserving
their original bias.

In this work, we turn these biases to the histo-
rian’s advantage and shed light on some aspects of
the history of antisemitism in France during the so
called long XIX century, between the French Rev-
olution and the First Word War, using diachronic
word embedding. This technique allows to cap-
ture diachronic conceptual changes and to analyse
stereotyped historical biases. We tracked how his-
torical events and publications influenced the con-
struction of the collective imaginary related to the
Jewish question.

We assume that words do not have a fixed mean-
ings. They can be used in different contexts to
evoke a great variety of meanings using different
connotational nuances. These multiple meanings
are acquired (or lost) over time in correspondence
to specific socio-political events. For example,
one of the meanings of the word usurier (i. e.;
money lender), as reported by the French Histor-
ical Dictionary, refers to: the financial activities
of the Jews [who since the Middle Ages were],
the only ones authorised to lend on pawns (Rey
et al., 2010). This association derives from the fact
that especially between the XVI and the XIX cen-
tury, this word acquired a negative connotation,
nurtured by anti-Jewish prejudice and stereotyping
developing from the idea of an illegitimate interest
attached to this activity. This image, as the above
mentioned definition explains, was also fixed in
the collective imaginary by Shylock, the Jewish
protagonist in Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice
(1598).



116

In this work, we trace the conceptual changes
of words related to the Jewish question. We col-
lected a large corpus for this purpose, composed
of thousands of books and newspapers published
in France between 1789 and 1914. We used di-
achronic word embedding to represent the data,
measures of local changes in the semantic space
of different words, and embedding projections
to quantify biases in different semantic spheres.
The measurement of local changes is particularly
suited for our study because we do not want to
identify new meanings in the words related to the
Jewish question, instead we want to trace how
the context of their use changed and how these
changes affected the representation of Jews at the
time of the rise of modern antisemitism. Measur-
ing biases over time is particularly interesting be-
cause it allows to connect them with antisemitic
streams as identified by historians in the field (Wil-
son, 1982) and operationalised by us.

2 Related Work

Models for capturing diachronic conceptual
changes are associated with the distributional
hypothesis (Harris, 1954; Firth, 1957; Weaver,
1955): the semantics of a word is defined by the
context in which it is used. Following this as-
sumption, different models have been presented,
based on co-occurrence vectors (Sagi et al., 2009;
Gulordava and Baroni, 2011; Basile et al., 2016)
or word embeddings (Kim et al., 2014; Kulkarni
et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2016a).

These works are brought together by the idea
of analysing the contexts in which a word occurs
and have culminated in the measures of seman-
tic shift and cultural drift, proposed by (Hamilton
et al., 2016a) and the law prototipicality proposed
by Dubossarsky et al. (2015). Semantic shifts
are regular linguistic processes such as semantic
widening (e.g., dog, that in Middle English was
used to refer to dogs of a particular breed) (Bloom-
field, 1933). This measure was used to derive two
laws of semantic change: the law of conformity:
semantic change scales with a negative power of
word frequency; and the law of innovation: poly-
semous words have significantly higher rates of se-
mantic change (Hamilton et al., 2016b). Cultural
drifts involve local changes to a lexical form’s use
(e.g.: the changes in the meaning of the word cell:
prison cell→ cell phone) (Hamilton et al., 2016a).
The law of prototipicality was introduced by Du-

bossarsky et al. (2015): it states that prototypical
words, words that are near to the centroid of a clus-
ter in a semantic space, change slower than words
that are in a peripheral position. The laws of con-
formity, innovation and prototipicality have been
questioned by Dubossarsky et al. (2017), who used
controlled conditions to test them.

Different works that tried to measure, directly
or indirectly, cultural drifts have been proposed re-
cently. Garg et al. (2018) analysed gender and eth-
nic stereotypes in the United States during the 20th
and 21st centuries, using word embeddings trained
on the Google Books and Corpus of Historical
American English (COHA) corpora. Kozlowski
et al. (2018) used diachronic word embeddings
to conduct macro-cultural investigation of social
stereotypes. Kutuzov et al. (2017) attempted to
model the dynamics of wordwide armed conflicts
using word embeddings trained on a news corpus.
Zhao et al. (2017) analyzed the amplification ef-
fect that learning models present on the gender di-
mension when trained on biased data.

3 Motivations and historical background

We have looked at linguistics representation of
Jews in 19th century France, which was one of
the cradles of modern antisemitism in Europe, i.e.
of the mostly secularized and racial transformation
of the centuries-old Christian prejudice against the
Jews (Katz, 1980).

Since the entry and gradual integration of the
Jews in French society after the Revolution of
1789, the appearance of anti-Jewish texts, the
rise of public controversies, or the burst of cases
and scandals in which Jews were supposedly in-
volved marked the emergence and spread of the
Jewish question on the French scene, in what
have been called antisemitic moments or episodes
(Birnbaum, 2011). Especially during the Third
Republic, beginning in 1870, references to Jews
entered the French public discourse in relation to
a supposed growing influence of the Jews on polit-
ical and economic affairs, the rise of anticlerical-
ism in the face of Catholic France (for which Jews
were considered responsible), the accusation of an
alliance between Jews and Freemasonry.

This process reached its climax with the Drey-
fus affair (1894), the unfounded accusation against
a French army officer to have sold intelligence in-
formation to the German enemy (Dreyfus would
be exonerated in 1906): the affair caused the heavy



117

spread of antisemitic accusations and anti-Jewish
movements of opinion (Wilson, 1982). Different
streams of antisemitism ran accross French society
throughout this time, together with a pro-Jewish
reaction driven by the supporters of Dreyfus’ in-
nocence (Kalman, 2010).

The publication in 1845 (republished in 1886)
of Alfred Toussenel’s Les Juifs rois de l’epoque
caused especially the rise of the so-called eco-
nomic antisemitism, which accused the Jews of
an increasing economic and financial influence, of
which the Rothschilds were considered the protag-
onists and became a symbol. This accusation was
later confirmed by the supposed Jewish role in the
crash of the Catholic bank Union Générale (1882)
and in the Panama corruption scandal (1892), to-
gether with the revival of nationalism tied to the
Boulangist crisis (Sternhell, 1998). These events
generated a resurgence of antisemitism. In re-
sponse to the growing secularization and anticler-
icalism, French Catholics revived an ancient tradi-
tion of religious antisemitism, marked in this time
by the appearance of works such as Gougenot des
Mousseaux’s Le Juif, le judaı̈sme et la judaı̈sation
des peuples chrétiens (1869) and by the anti-
Jewish campaigns of Catholic periodicals such as
L’Univers and La Croix.

In 1886 the journalist Edouard Drumont pub-
lished the hugely successful La France juive. Es-
sai d’histoire contemporaine, which described a
French society under a greedy Jewish influence
and control, painting in the style of a novelist (in-
spired by Balzac and by contemporary feuilletons
or serialized novels) the contours of Jewish con-
spiracies. Although the subtitle of the work sug-
gests an essay of contemporary history, on read-
ing it is as if one is before an enormous cauldron
of common place assumptions on Jews which in-
cludes Catholic, social, racial, economic, and con-
spiratorial anti-Semitism. The success of his work
depended on the waves it made in the intellectual
milieu of the era and its impact on the popular
masses attracted by the synthesis of anti-Semitism
of the right, of a church worried about laicisation,
and anti-Semitism of the left, anti-capitalist and
laical. This and other books by Drumont mixed
Catholic, socio-political, ethic and conspirationist
antisemitism, accusing Jews of all sorts of reli-
gious offenses, political machinations, moral per-
versions and secret plots (Kauffmann, 2008).

The combination of these streams of anti-Jewish

accusations, prejudices and stereotypes would
christallize - or reach its climax - in the Dreyfus
affair. We suggest that the usage in print (books
and periodicals) of the term juif or other terms re-
lated to the Jewish question, all characterised by
an adverse bias, was especially connected to an-
tisemitic tendencies. However, we should note
that this vocabulary was also present at the time
in Biblical and theological scholarship, art and art-
historical publications, fictional and theatrical lit-
erature, medical treatises and the rising social sci-
ences. References to Jews in the public discourse
were therefore not necessarily mobilised in a po-
litical context with explicit antisemitics aims. Our
investigation asks whether using diachronic word
embeddings trained on a large corpus confirms
the chronological development of antisemitic lan-
guage which historians have described on a quali-
tative level (and if it sheds light on different, pre-
viously ignored, antisemitic moments). We also
examine the relevance of the semantic areas or
streams in relation to the Jew which we have iden-
tified based on (Wilson, 1982), and we show the
trends through time of unfavourable biases to-
wards Jews in the period considered.

4 The Corpus and the Embeddings

4.1 The corpus

The corpus1 was constructed downloading from
Gallica, the online library of the Bibliothèque Na-
tionale de France2, the raw text of all the resources
that contain a keyword related to Jews (see ap-
pendix A for the complete list of keywords) and
have been published between 1789-1914. The re-
search was further restricted to those resources
that have an OCR quality higher that 98%. The re-
sulting corpus contains 54.403 books and 245.188
periodicals issues. It is important to notice here
that we downloaded the full text of a book or news-
paper issue even if a keyword appeared only once
in it.

Figures 1a and 1b indicate the distribution of re-
sources per year in the periodicals and books sub-
corpora, respectively, together with the total num-
ber of resources in Gallica. The resources distri-
bution per year is not homogenous in neither sub-
corpora: publications increase significantly year

1The metadata of the corpus, the embeddings and the
code used for the experiments can be downloaded from
https://github.com/roccotrip/antisem.

2https://gallica.bnf.fr/



118

(a) Periodicals distribution (b) Books distribution (c) Tokens distribution (d) Num. of tokens in each bin

Figure 1: Distribuition of resources in the corpus and time bins division.

by year. Several hypotheses can explain this pro-
liferation of documents over time. One straightfor-
ward hypothesis can be related to increasing im-
portance of Jews in the French public debate with
the proliferation of anti-Semitic movements and
newspapers such as La Croix, La libre parole, La
Lutte antijuive and L’Intransigeant, just to name a
few. Yet, a second hypothesis can be related to the
fact that the print industry grew over time. In fact,
many newspapers and publishers were founded af-
ter 1825. For example, Hachette, the publisher
with the largest number of books in our corpus
(1558), was founded in 1826. The newspapers Le
Figaro was founded in 1826, L’Univers in 1833
and Le Temps in 1861. Figure 1a and 1b, plotting
our corpus compared to the whole Gallica one,
seems to suggest that the second hypothesis is the
most plausible. In fact, the quantities of resources
in our corpora follow a trend similar to those ob-
served in the whole Gallica.

4.2 The embeddings

Figure 1c shows the distribution of tokens per year
distinguishing periodicals and books. The greater
part of the data is from the periodicals, giving to
the corpus a focus on the contemporaneity. Given
this distribution it is impossible to train a model
using equally sized time bins. For this reason,
we decided to group the data into approximately
equal bins in terms of tokens. The resulting divi-
sion comprehend 26 time bins of ≈ 450 millions
tokens each (see Figure 1d).

For each bin we trained a word2vec skip-gram
model (Mikolov et al., 2013) using a window size
of 5 words on both sides, a word vector of 300 di-
mensions and removing the words that occur less
than 25 times.

5 Analysis

In this section we analyse the resulting embed-
dings. First we study the changes in the seman-
tic space of 4 target words. Then we analyse the
biases of the same words for 6 different dimen-
sions, each of which corresponds to a predeter-
mined stream.

5.1 Local changes

The first analysis that we conducted is the
measurement of the changes in the seman-
tic space of the words used to refer to
Jews: juif (noun/adjective, masculine, singular),
juifs (noun/adjective, masculine, plural), juive
(noun/adjective, feminine, singular) and juives
(noun/adjective, feminine, plural). For this mea-
surement we used the local neighborhood measure
proposed by Hamilton et al. (2016a). To compute
this measure it is necessary to create a second or-
der vector, s, according to equation 1,

sti = cos-sim(w
(t)
i ,w

(t)
j )∀wj ∈ Nk(w

(t)
i )∪

Nk(w(t+1)i ),
(1)

where Nk(w(t)i ) represents the k-nearest neigh-
bours (k − nn) at time (t) (according to cosine
similarity) of a target word wi and w∗ is the em-
bedding corresponding to word w∗. Once these
vectors are constructed we compute the cosine dis-
tance, d, among them to quantify their differences,
with equation 2,

d(st1i , st2i ) = 1 − cos-sim(st1i , st2i ). (2)

The results of this experiment are presented in
Figure 2 for all the morphological variants of the
word juif, using k = 1003. What emerges clearly

3We noticed that the general trend of the curves in Figure
2 does not change much using different values of k (10, 25,



119

(a) juif (b) juifs (c) juive (d) juives

Figure 2: Local neighborhood measure. The y axes indicates the cosine distance of the second-order vector
constructed for each time period compared to the 1789 (blu line) and the preceding time period (red line).

juif juifs juive juives
⤸ 1841 󲾷 ⤸ 1861 󲾷 ⤸ 1874 󲾷 ⤸ 1870 󲾷

laquedem juive crucifient juif huguenots judaı̈que syriennes négociantes
mécréant judaı̈que schismatiques israëlites favorite musulmane iraniennes samaritaines
rogatons rabin judaı̈sants juive opera syrienne musulmanes réfugiées

blasphémateur bouddhiste fétichistes rabbins rigoletto héroine israëlites ascètes
⤸ 1886 󲾷 ⤸ 1870 󲾷 ⤸ 1886 󲾷 ⤸ 1880 󲾷

ghetto judaı̈que judaı̈sants juif drumont iranienne israélites épousées
déicides rabin hérétiques synagogues antisémitisme apostasié musulmanes luthériennes

francmaçon wanderghen cabalistes talmud circoncis lithuanienne femmes turques
aryen anabaptiste lucifériens sanhédrin théàtrale puritaine célébrations dissolues

⤸ 1893 󲾷 ⤸ 1897 󲾷 ⤸ 1893 󲾷 ⤸ 1897 󲾷
déicide talmud antisémites samaritains juiverie synagogue juif dissolues
youtre bouddhiste youtres talmud satanisme héroine youtres baptisées

francmaçon sodomite youpins idolâtres monogamique lapidée antijuives prostituaient
youpins anabaptiste enjuivés pharisiens opprimée persécutrice antisémitiques ascètes
⤸ 1897 󲾷 ⤸ 1905 󲾷 ⤸ 1901 󲾷 ⤸ 1905 󲾷

youtre rabin judaı̈sants synagogues stigmatisant dragonnade massacrées courtisannes
sémite usurier hellénisants talmud antijuive torturée terrorisées paı̈ennes

judaı̈sant shylock diaspora pharisiens antinationale puritaine diaspora prostituaient
antisémite anabaptiste massacrant ismaélites dreyfusiste anabaptiste déportées émigrées

Table 1: Words that have been introduced (left column ⤸) or eliminated (right column 󲾷) for our 4 target words in
time periods with a high local neighborhood distance, compared to 1789.

from these figures is that there are certain peri-
ods of time in which the relation among a target
word and its local neighbourhood changed consis-
tently. What we noticed from them is that besides
changes in the relative similarity among two words
what changes more is the k-nn itself, with the in-
troduction or elimination of specific words.

Some of the words that were introduced (or
eliminated) to (from) the k-nn of relevant time pe-
riods (according to local neighbourhood measure)
are presented in Table 1. The words in this ta-
ble are ordered according to the cosine similarity
with the target word. We can see an elimination
of words related to the religious domain for all the
target words that we used, terms like rabbin (i.e.,
rabbi), talmud (i.e. the study of the Jewish law),

50, 100) and that fixing k = 100 gives a good representation
of the variations over time. Increasing this value gives high
fluctuations and introduces many irrelevant words.

synagogue and sanhédrin (i.e., the Jewish coun-
cil) are replaced by more negatively connotated
words such as ghetto, déicides, antisémites and an-
tijuives. From the few words presented in Table 1
one can also notice a possible rise of antisemitic
prejudice (or at least of antisemitic language), with
the introduction of specific words in the vocabu-
lary specifically tailored to connote Jewish people
in a derogatory way. Youtre and youpin are slang
racist insults negatively connoting the Jew. They
appear increasingly during the period 1880-1900.

Other terms with a negative connotation that en-
tered the semantic area of our target words are
judaı̈sants (i.e., judaizers), enjuivés (i.e., strongly
influenced by the Jewish spirit) and francmaçon
(i.e., freemason). These terms, as we will see in
the next section, are related to the idea of a Jewish
conspiracy against the world. This is a clear ex-
ample of the growth of the antisemitic vocabulary.



120

The analysis of the word juive is especially in-
teresting. The word drumont entered its space in
the time period 1886-1889. It refers to Éduard
Drumont, a well known antisemite who published
one of the bestsellers of the antisemitism (La
France juive), in 1886, and was the editor of an
antisemitic newspaper (La libre Parole), founded
in 1892. We can also notice that in the semantic
space of the word juive there are different words
related to theatre. This probably derives from
literary and theatre representations of Jewish fe-
male characters, as well as references to supposed
Jewish inappropriate moral and sexual behaviours.
Among the theatre representations we may recall
that of La Juive, first shown in 1835, one of the
most popular French operas of the 19th century,
which tells the story of an impossible love affair
between a Christian man and a Jewish woman.
The fictional Jew, invariably seen as an outsider,
provides a mirror for the phobias and obsessions of
French society at a time when old Jew hatred be-
comes politicised, when anti-Semitism begins to
permeate French ideology (Weinberg, 1983; Hall-
man, 2007; Samuels, 2009).

We can also see the introduction of the word
aryen (i.e.: aryan) in 1886. This word entered the
semantic space in a syntagmatic relation with the
word juif and, as we will see in the next section,
the period in which it entered is characterised by
a strong antisemitism characterised by an intensi-
fication of racial and socio-political stereotypes.

Figure 3: Semantic axis and projections.

5.2 Embedding projections
5.2.1 The streams
To quantify biases in word embeddings semantic
spaces it is common to project a specific word
vector on a semantic axis (Bolukbasi et al., 2016;
Caliskan et al., 2017). The semantic axis can be
computed as g =wi −wj and its projection as the
dot product b̂ =w ⋅g, assuming that the vectors are
normalised, the projection is equal to the cosine
similarity. The higher the values of the projection,
the more biased the word is toward that direction.

In previous literature (Bolukbasi et al., 2016)
the gender direction (e.g., h⃗e − ⃗she) was used
to project words related to occupations in or-
der to quantify if these words embed information

about gender. In this work we do not want to
project words only according to a single direc-
tion but we want to analyse different adverse and
(or) favourable biases, comparing them over time.
For this reason, we defined six different seman-
tic axes, that correspond to six antisemitic streams
(S) (Wilson, 1982).

For each stream, s ∈ S, we identi-
fied a set of n antonyms pairs, zs =
{(aneg1 , a

pos
1 ), ..., (a

neg
n , a

pos
n )} to construct

the bias subspace in the embedding. To avoid
selection biases we selected the antonyms pairs
starting from a positive seed word, that is
highly representative for the stream, and used
a knowledge base to collect its synonyms and
the corresponding antonyms (see appendix B for
the complete list of antonyms used). We noticed
that computing the PCA of each subspaces the
corresponding explained variance is concentrated
on the first component and that it is stable over
time. For example, the first component of the
racial stream has an explained variance of 0.34
(mean) with a standard deviation of 0.012.

The six different semantic areas, which may
correspond to related antisemitic discourses are:

1. religious: antisemitism based on theological
doctrines or narratives, and on religious prej-
udices and accusations. The seed word is be-
liever (unbeliever);

2. economic: antisemitism based on a supposed
Jewish role in the economy or on stereotypes
concerning Jews’ economic behaviours. The
seed word is generosity (greed);

3. socio-political: antisemitism based on malev-
olent, e.g. anti-national, political behaviours
or on supposedly threatening Jewish actions.
The seed word is honor (shame);

4. racial: antisemitism based on the definition
of Jews as a race, considered inferior. The
seed word is pure (impure);

5. conspiratorial: antisemitism based on con-
spiracy theories. The seed word is loyal (dis-
loyal);

6. ethic: antisemitism based on Jewish sup-
posed unethical or perverse morals or be-
haviours. The seed word is moral (immoral);

To quantify the biases for all the time we com-
puted the mean bias, b, for each stream as the



121

Figure 4: Projections of our 4 target words to the 6 semantic axes. Positive values indicates the adverse bias.

arithmetic mean of the individual biases, b̂ on each
axis, according to equation 3:

b(wi, s) =
1

n

n

󱮦
j=1

wi ⋅ (wanegj −waposj ), (3)

where n is the number of antonyms pairs in stream
s, Given the ordering of the antonyms in the com-
putation of the bias axis (g = wanegj −waposj ) we
define an adverse bias when b is positive and a
favourable bias when b is negative.

An example of semantic axis constructed with
the pair disloyal as negative word and loyal as
positive, is presented in Figure 3 ( ⃗disloyal −
⃗disloyal). From this figure we can see that words

that have a high projection value are words very
similar to the negative word, on the other hand,
words with a low projection are very similar to the
word on the other side. The projection tells us if a
word is closer to one extreme or the other. Unbi-
ased words should have a projection close to 0.

5.2.2 Biases related to Jews
The results of this experiment are presented in Fig-
ure 4. The adverse bias is always high for the
words juif, juifs and juive. For the word juives
only on few cases it is negative. Adverse and
favourable biases are measured with positive and
negative measures respectively.

Our analysis confirms the chronological devel-
opment of antisemitic moments identified by histo-
rians, with a steady increase of adverse bias start-

ing in the 1880s, before the Dreyfus affair. We
also notice an unexpected peak in adverse bias
between 1855 and 1866, in connection with the
French Second Empire (1851-1870). The seman-
tic areas or streams in relation to the Jew identified
on the basis of (Wilson, 1982) seem relevant for
the description of adverse bias in antisemitic mo-
ments. The highest adverse bias characterises the
religious semantic area, followed by the economic
and ethic areas. The religious adverse bias shows
a peak starting in 1855, after the establishment of
Napoleon III’s Second Empire, a time of renewed
allegiance to the Catholic Church and in 1895 at
the beginning of the Dreyfus affair. Also the eco-
nomic adverse bias shows a peak starting in 1855,
perhaps because of the increase of economic dis-
course on Jews following the publication of Tou-
ssenel’s Les Juifs rois de l’époque, and again coin-
ciding with the establishment of the Second Em-
pire. Another peak comes with the Dreyfus af-
fair. The ethic adverse bias peaks in the period
1830-1855, diminishes afterward and peaks again
toward the end of the Dreyfus affair.

Racial, conspiratorial and especially sociopolit-
ical semantic areas show a steady adverse bias and
an increase mostly after 1886, i.e. after the publi-
cation of Drumont’s La France juive (1886). The
conspiratorial adverse bias also peaks – like the re-
ligious, the economic and the ethic adverse bias –
in 1855.

The singular juif prevails in the conspiratorial



122

Figure 5: Cumulative bias projections compared to different religious groups.

Figure 6: Cumulative bias projections for other words used to refer to Jews.

and socio-political semantic areas, which seem to
entail general statements about the Jew. This ten-
dency has been noticed by historians as typical of
modern antisemitism and has been called singular-
isation (Miccoli, 2003). This underlines that there
are features common to all [Jews], because in all
and every one there emerges something which con-
stitutes a common and exclusive feature of the Jew
as the enemy to be defeated (Miccoli, 2003). On
the other hand, the plural juifs prevails in the eco-
nomic and ethic areas, as implying collective be-
haviours of Jews.

Racial, sociopolitical and conspiratorial seman-
tic areas show a steady adverse bias and increase
especially after 1886. As the racist vision of the
Jew increases, it is turned increasingly into a po-
litical vision, and it is also nourished by a con-
spirationist worldview, which will culminate in the
Dreyfus affair.

5.2.3 Comparative biases concerning
different religious groups

The results of this experiment are presented in
Figure 5. They show a comparison with three
different religious groups: Catholic, (catholique),
Protestant (protestante) and Muslim (musulman).
The plots sum positive and negative biases to give

a general picture of the biases at each time step.
Juif and catholic have a completely opposite

bias: exclusively adverse in the first case, entirely
favorable in the latter. Confronting juif and protes-
tant we notice a similar bias, adverse in the first
case, favorable in the latter. But the favorable
bias of Protestant is much more reduced than that
of catholic. Confronting juifs and protestantes,
both show an adverse bias (lower in the case of
Protestants). The adverse bias concerns protes-
tantes especially in relation to the religious do-
main. Musulman and musulmans also show an ad-
verse bias concentrated in the religious sphere. If
we look at racial stream, this grows for juif(s) ref-
erence to protestants is absent; while there is an
occasional emergence of musulman, with an ad-
verse bias between 1789 and 1840, when ques-
tions of citizenship are being defined (France con-
quers Egypt in 1798 and in 1834 Algeria is an-
nexed to France; in 1870 the Crémieux Decree
granted French citizenship to Algerian Jews but
not to Muslims), and a favourable bias in 1891-
95 (in 1890 a bill is proposed for the granting of
French citizenship to Algerian muslims, see Weill,
2005). The last increase is probably also con-
nected with the availability of a larger quantity of
digitised North-African press in the corpus.



123

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 7: Target words frequency.

5.2.4 Comparative bias concerning different
words used to refer to Jews

The results of this experiment are presented in Fig-
ure 6. Israelite and israelites do not show a partic-
ular bias as the terms are often used euphemisti-
cally (including by Jews themselves), i.e. pre-
ferred to the more direct and connotated juif and
juifs. These terms refers to the cultural assimila-
tion and social integration of Jews into French so-
ciety, as described by Honoré (1981).

The slang and derogatory youpin spread starting
around 1886; its shows an exclusively adverse bias
and a trend similar to juif, as if the terms juif and
youpin were interchangeable.

5.3 Target words frequency

Even if the corpus has been constructed selecting
documents containing words related to the Jew-
ish question, we noticed that the frequencies of
words related to other religious groups is higher
for catholique and catholiques and slightly lower
for the words protestant, protestantes, musulman
and musulmanes. The frequencies of all the target
wordsare reported in Figure 7a, 7b and 7c.

6 Conclusions

References to Jews increase throughout the 19th
century, as Jews were integrated within French so-
ciety and these references appear to be mostly as-
sociated with an adverse bias in all semantic ar-
eas. The adverse bias grows starting in the mid-
1880s, i.e. in the second half of the Third Repub-
lic, when the rise of anticlericalism and socialism
was associated with Jews by the conservative and
catholic public opinion. Around this time the pub-
lication of Drumont’s La France juive provokes
an adverse bias towards Jews clearly associated to
antisemitic discourse in all semantic areas, which
prepares the outburst of the Dreyfus affair, and it

remains steady during and after the affair.
The highest adverse bias characterises the re-

ligious semantic area, followed by the economic
and ethic spheres. The conspiratorial and sociopo-
litical areas show an adverse bias more often as-
sociated with the singular juif, as if they provoked
categorical statements. Adverse bias in the eco-
nomic and ethic areas is expressed through the plu-
ral juifs as describing collective behaviours.

The confrontation between juif and catholic
shows an entirely adverse bias in the first case and
an entirely favorable bias in the latter case. The
adverse bias towards other minorities, i.e. Protes-
tants and Muslims concerns the religious semantic
area. No bias concerning protestant emerges in the
racial semantic area, while a negative and positive
bias emerge in relation to Muslims at times when
the question of French citizenship is being defined.

As one evaluates the presence of the word juif,
and the semantic areas surrounding it, one should
also consider that these may emerge in texts which
are not antisemitic per se, but still contribute to the
spread of images of Jews, with specific biases. We
refer here especially to literary texts.

We suggest that the adverse bias in various se-
mantic areas may be associated with antisemitic
discourses, but this association should be further
explored though an examination of the historical
context (for example that of antisemitic moments)
or an analysis of the textual sources which spread
the words associated with the Jew.

Acknowledgments

The authors of this work have received fund-
ing from the European Union’s Horizon

2020 research and innovation programme under
grant agreement No 732942. The experiments
have been run on the SCSCF cluster of Ca’ Fos-
cari University.



124

References
Pierpaolo Basile, Annalina Caputo, Roberta Luisi, and

Giovanni Semeraro. 2016. Diachronic analysis of
the italian language exploiting google ngram. CLiC
it, page 56.

Pierre Birnbaum. 2011. The anti-semitic moment: A
tour of France in 1898. Chicago University Press.

Leonard Bloomfield. 1933. Language. George Allen
and Unwin LTD.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems,
pages 4349–4357.

Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334):183–186.

Haim Dubossarsky, Yulia Tsvetkov, Chris Dyer, and
Eitan Grossman. 2015. A bottom up approach to
category mapping and meaning change. In Net-
WordS, pages 66–70.

Haim Dubossarsky, Daphna Weinshall, and Eitan
Grossman. 2017. Outta control: Laws of semantic
change and inherent biases in word representation
models. In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 1136–1145.

John R Firth. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory,
1930-1955. Studies in Linguistic Analysis.

Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and
James Zou. 2018. Word embeddings quantify
100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
115(16):E3635–E3644.

Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a
pig: Debiasing methods cover up systematic gender
biases in word embeddings but do not remove them.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03862.

Kristina Gulordava and Marco Baroni. 2011. A dis-
tributional similarity approach to the detection of
semantic change in the google books ngram cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the GEMS 2011 workshop
on geometrical models of natural language seman-
tics, pages 67–71.

Diana R Hallman. 2007. Opera, Liberalism, and An-
tisemitism in Nineteenth-Century France: The Pol-
itics of Halévy’s La Juive. Cambridge University
Press.

William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016a. Cultural shift or linguistic drift? comparing
two computational measures of semantic change. In

Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, volume 2016, page 2116. NIH Public Access.

William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Juraf-
sky. 2016b. Diachronic word embeddings reveal
statistical laws of semantic change. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.09096.

Zellig S Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(2-3):146–162.

Jean-Paul Honoré. 1981. Le vocabulaire de
l’antisémitisme en france pendant l’affaire dreyfus.
Mots. Les langages du politique, 2(1):73–92.

Julie Kalman. 2010. Rethinking antisemitism in
nineteenth-century France. Cambridge University
Press.

Jacob Katz. 1980. From prejudice to destruction: anti-
Semitism, 1700-1933. Harvard University Press.

Grégoire Kauffmann. 2008. Édouard Drumont. Per-
rin.

Yoon Kim, Yi-I Chiu, Kentaro Hanaki, Darshan Hegde,
and Slav Petrov. 2014. Temporal analysis of lan-
guage through neural language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1405.3515.

Austin C Kozlowski, Matt Taddy, and James A Evans.
2018. The geometry of culture: Analyzing mean-
ing through word embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.09288.

Vivek Kulkarni, Rami Al-Rfou, Bryan Perozzi, and
Steven Skiena. 2015. Statistically significant de-
tection of linguistic change. In Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on World Wide Web,
pages 625–635. International World Wide Web Con-
ferences Steering Committee.

Andrey Kutuzov, Erik Velldal, and Lilja Øvrelid.
2017. Temporal dynamics of semantic relations
in word embeddings: an application to predict-
ing armed conflict participants. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.08660.

Giovanni Miccoli. 2003. Antiebraismo, antisemitismo:
un nesso fluttuante. In Les racines chrétiennes de
l’antisémitisme politique, pages 1000–1021. École
française de Rome.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.

Alain Rey, Chantal Tanet, and Marianne Tomi. 2010.
Dictionnaire historique de la langue française.



125

Eyal Sagi, Stefan Kaufmann, and Brady Clark. 2009.
Semantic density analysis: Comparing word mean-
ing across time and phonetic space. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Geometrical Models of Natu-
ral Language Semantics, pages 104–111. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Maurice Samuels. 2009. Inventing the Israelite: Jew-
ish Fiction in Nineteenth-Century France. Stanford
University Press.

Zeev Sternhell. 1998. La droite révolutionnaire: les
origines francaises du fascisme 1885-1914. Galli-
mard.

Rob Voigt, Nicholas P Camp, Vinodkumar Prab-
hakaran, William L Hamilton, Rebecca C Hetey,
Camilla M Griffiths, David Jurgens, Dan Jurafsky,
and Jennifer L Eberhardt. 2017. Language from
police body camera footage shows racial dispari-
ties in officer respect. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(25):6521–6526.

Warren Weaver. 1955. Translation. Machine Transla-
tion of Languages, 14:15–23.

Henry H Weinberg. 1983. The image of the jew in late
nineteenth-century french literature. Jewish Social
Studies, 45(3/4):241–250.

Stephen Wilson. 1982. Ideology and experience: anti-
semitism in France at the time of the Dreyfus affair.
Fairleigh Dickinson University Press; London: As-
sociated University Presses.

Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2017. Men also like
shopping: Reducing gender bias amplification us-
ing corpus-level constraints. In Proceedings of the
2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing.

Jieyu Zhao, Yichao Zhou, Zeyu Li, Wei Wang, and Kai-
Wei Chang. 2018. Learning gender-neutral word
embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01496.

A Keywords

• Juif (i.e: Jew - masculine, singular)

• Juive (i.e: Jew - feminine, singular)

• Judaisme (i.e: Judaism)

• Israëlite (i.e: Israelite)

• Israël (i.e: Israel)

• Israëlitisme (i.e: Israelitism)

• Mosaı̈sme (i.e: religions referred to the mes-
sage of Moses)

• Talmud (i.e: Talmud)

• Judas (i.e: Judass)

• Moloch (i.e: the biblical name of a Canaanite
god associated with child sacrifice)

• Ahasverus (i.e: a mythical immortal man
whose legend began to spread in Europe in
the 13th century. The original legend con-
cerns a Jew who taunted Jesus on the way to
the Crucifixion and was then cursed to walk
the earth until the Second Coming.)

B Bias axes

The list of antonyms used to compute the bias
axes. Note that the translation of the antonyms
pairs is provided only for the singular. We used a
public resource (http://www.synonyms-fr.com) to
collect antonyms relations.

Religious angel, devil; sacred, profane; pious,
atheist; pious, pagan; pious, idolater; pious, im-
pious; sacred, cursed; venerable, abject; faithful,
unfaithful; believer, unbeliever; religious, irreli-
gious; dedicated, atheist.

Economic give, appropriate; generosity, greed;
generous, greedy; generous, miserly; generous,
stingy.

Socio-political prodigal, greedy; honest, rabble;
honor, shame; friendly, hostile; loyal, deceitful;
socialist, capitalist; friend, enemy; ally, antago-
nist; conservative, progressive.

Racial normal, strange; superiority, inferiority;
equality, inequality; pleasant, unpleasant; benign,
wicked; worthy, infamous; sympathy, hate; ac-
cepted, refused, better, worse; national, foreign;
pure, impure; upper, lower; pure, filthy; clean,
dirty.

Conspiratorial loyal; spy; honesty, treason;
loyal, disloyal; clear, mysterious; obvious, oc-
cult; sincere, deceitful; sincere, unfair; benefactor,
criminal; clear, secret; friendly, threatening; clear,
dark.

Ethic chastity, lust; modest, intriguing; decent,
indecent; virtuous, lascivious; faithful, unfaith-
ful; moral, immoral; honest, dishonest; chaste, de-
praved; chaste, fleshly; pure, degenerate.


