






















































“Condescending, Rude, Assholes”: Framing gender and hostility on Stack Overflow


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online, pages 172–180
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

172

Abstract 

The disciplines of Gender Studies and Data 

Science are incompatible. This is 

conventional wisdom, supported by how 

many computational studies simplify 

gender into an immutable binary 

categorization that appears crude to the 

critical social researcher. I argue that the 

characterization of gender norms is context 

specific and may prove valuable in 

constructing useful models. I show how 

gender can be framed in computational 

studies as a stylized repetition of acts 

mediated by a social structure, and not a 

possessed biological category. By 

conducting a review of existing work, I 

show how gender should be explored in 

multiplicity in computational research 

through clustering techniques, and layout 

how this is being achieved in a study in 

progress on gender hostility on Stack 

Overflow. 

1 Introduction 

The binarization of gender in computational 

studies often does not sit well with critical 

theorists. Treated as the ultimate and most simple 

categorical variable, 0 = Female and 1 = Male is 

hardcoded into quantitative approaches from the 

first introductory text. In contrast, critical scholars 

see gender as social structure, arguing that it 

creates opportunities and constraints based on a 

sex-category. From this standpoint, the so called 

differences between men and women are entirely 

social conventions and the male-female binary is a 

fallacy. From Butler’s (1990) work, scholars have 

understood gender as performative and existing as 

a stylized repetition of acts rather than an intense 

adherence to two distinct classifications. Yet, 

Butler’s (1990) stylized acts and gendered self are 

limited by the recursive processes inherent in 

gender as a stratification. Risman (2004) argues 

gender is a social structure, having consequence on 

the individual level in the development of the self, 

in interaction, and institutional domains. This 

paper focuses on the consequences of gender social 

structures in computational cultures, forming the 

groundwork of a larger doctoral project into how 

culture and role-based identities intervene in 

women’s participation and legitimate interaction in 

informal coding cultures.  

The title for this paper originates from the most 

common words that women used to describe Stack 

Overflow, the world’s largest programming forum. 

In their annual survey in 2019, Stack Overflow 

asked just under 80,000 users what aspects of the 

platform they would most like to change – which 

showed some interesting gender disagreements. 

The words most likely to differentiate men 

included “official, complex, algorithm”, whilst the 

words that differentiated women painted a quite 

different picture; “condescending, rude, assholes” 

(Stack Overflow, 2019). This gender difference in 

participation and perception of the Stack Overflow 

community is the basis of the project outlined in 

this paper, showing how hostility in 

‘condescension’ and ‘rudeness’ deters women from 

taking part in programming.  

In presenting the findings of this year’s Stack 

Overflow Developers Survey these results where 

weighted by gender for the first time. Far from 

demonstrating an understanding of prejudice and 

hostility on the platform, the weighting was 

justified by “characteristics of [the] data” to 

“correct for demographic skew” (Stack Overflow, 

2019). The lack of women in computational 

cultures is not a simple sampling error or a 

characteristic of data, but an active gender filter 

that deters women from taking part. I support a 

move in data science to infuse computational 

techniques with the capacity to reflect gendered 

power relations, moving beyond data based 

“Condescending, Rude, Assholes”: 

Framing gender and hostility on Stack Overflow  
 

Siân Brooke 
Oxford Internet Institute  

University of Oxford 

United Kingdom 
sian.brooke@oii.ox.ac.uk 

 

 



173

dismissals. In justifying my stance, I will first 

outline scholarship on the merits of studying 

identity and gender within a social context and how 

research design should acknowledge stereotypes. 

Next, I will show how women’s participation in 

computational culture effects and is affect by 

anonymity. Thirdly, I will discuss the difficulties of 

operationalizing gender and the potential benefits 

of complicating the binary model. Finally, I will 

show how clustering has shown to be a promising 

technique to account for gender structures in online 

forums and my own proposed study. Overall, this 

paper argues for complicating the gender binary, 

forgoing predictive accuracy for representative and 

messy modelling. 

2 Identity in Context 

Early studies of the Internet heralded its 

disembodying attributes as liberating and a 

precursor of equality. It was proposed that 

anonymity can subjugate gender hierarchies, 

allowing for free and unhindered expression 

(Allen, 1995). However, as we make sense of 

identity online, we often round to the most 

common attributes, and thus anonymity serves to 

homogenize participants in online forums as 

belonging to a singular group. This group is college 

educated, white, and male (Kendall, 2011; 

Massanari, 2015). The prevailing voice here 

amplifies the discourse of an apparently neutral 

meritocracy – hiding the inequalities of race and 

gender.  

Critical research has a long history of 

investigating gender, inequality, and interaction. 

Whilst the principles of social structures are 

pertinent across contexts, their exact form can 

change with social locale (Bucholtz & Hall, 2005; 

Risman, 2004). Wenger & Lave (1991) propose 

that researchers of such collective identities should 

focus on communities of practice (CoP) in which 

members are drawn together by a common interest 

or that are created deliberately with the goal of 

gaining knowledge in a certain field. This 

conception has since been expanded to include 

virtual communities of practice (VCoP), to show 

the extension of this anthropological phenomenon 

online. Stack Overflow can count as one such 

VCoP, as individuals come together to solve their 

programming woes. In such communities, 

Bucholtz (2005) argues that a situational and 

context-based methodology is fundamental to 

understanding the gendered social meaning that is 

attributed to practices by individuals and cultures. 

Moreover, the representation of identity in speech 

should be conceptualized in terms of communities 

of as identity, not collections of individuals (or 

observations) as the bestowing of agency cannot be 

segregated from culture. In this manner, one’s 

identity and behavior towards others is shaped by 

the community in which one participates and 

interacts – even online.  

 

3 Gender in Context 

In the initial scholarly discussion of identity 

formation and interaction, Lakoff (1973) first 

proposed that men and women differ in how they 

use words. Whilst gendered meaning necessitates 

difference, a difference in speech does not directly 

imply gendered meanings. A man’s speech being 

different to women’s means little without context. 

To ascertain if gendered differences carry meaning 

one must look at the interrelated layers of the 

interaction, such as what it means for a woman to 

be a speaker in this particular scenario (Needle & 

Pierrehumbert, 2018). What does it mean to be a 

woman to correct a man in computer science 

classroom? What does it mean for a man to fail a 

mathematics class but excel in a gender studies 

course? Such identity struggles are visible in 

discourse, or how knowledge creates meaning in 

interaction as a consequence of social structure 

(Risman, 2004). It is thus is necessary to consider 

the social context when considering how gender 

may be presented.  

Gender can alter how a community talks about 

itself and its members. In using the sociolinguistic 

framing of gender and local context, feminist 

linguists have pointed to how normative discourse 

can represent gendered power structures and the 

male-centric nature of language (Lamerichs & Te 

Molder, 2003; Tanczer, 2015). This is particularly 

apparent in the use of ‘guys’ as a collective. As we 

move online, the physical markers of gender are 

invisible in anonymous forums, and male-

centricity is amplified to male-by-default (Tanczer, 

2015). As a space becomes more masculine and the 

in-group becomes male, women are framed in 

terms of stereotypes and identity tropes (Tanczer, 

2015). In computational cultures, this 

communication process cultivates a femininity of 

technological incompetence and juvenile ‘girlness’ 

(Nic Giolla Easpaig & Humphrey, 2016; Shifman 

& Lemish, 2011). A male dominated masculine 



174

space can therefore lead to understanding women 

only in terms of the outsider.  

There are consequences to stereotypes as they 

are relational. Gender stereotypes can be 

internalized and influence the manner in which one 

conceives of their own abilities and those of others. 

Risman’s (2004) conception of gender as a 

encompassing social structure permeates online 

and offline interaction. As gender shapes 

interactions due to cultural expectations it also 

shapes one’s identity, and there are consequences 

for institutional domains and technological 

cultures. As gender power relations are evident in 

self-presentation and interaction, this in turn affects 

opportunities in formal settings as stereotypes 

dictate expectations of others and ourselves 

(Adams et al,  2006). A popular theory in social 

psychology, stereotype threat refers to being at risk 

of confirming, as a self-characteristic, a negative 

stereotype about one's social group (Steele & 

Aronson, 2000). When one’s self is viewed in 

terms of a salient group membership, 

performances can be undermined because of 

concerns about confirming negative stereotypes of 

one’s group. In other words, telling women they 

can’t code because they are women becomes a self-

fulfilling prophesy - a false definition of the 

situation evokes new behavior, which makes the 

original false conception come true. Ergo, women 

can’t code so there are few women in 

programming, from here we have ‘proof’ of the 

original stance that women can’t code. 

 

4 Girls can’t code 

In negotiating identity in masculine or nerd 

dominated spaces on, women may purposefully 

obscure their gender to participate in the social 

structures of a technical setting. The prominence of 

stereotypes and the belief that “girls can’t code” 

means that women who show they are women in 

programming forums often face hostility and 

harassment (Ford et al., 2016). Nonetheless, Terrell 

et al (2017) found that women’s contributions of 

code to the repository GitHub were approved at a 

higher rate than code written by men. In fact, 

women’s contribution acceptance rates were 

higher than men for every programming language 

in the top 10 on the GitHub platform (Terrell et al 

2017). However, when women’s gender was 

identifiable on their GitHub profile, their 

acceptance rate dropped to significantly lower than 

the average for men (Terrell et al., 2017). This 

shows not only do women obscure their gender in 

order to participate, but they are penalised when 

their gender is known, dropping below the level of 

men. 

Looking to Stack Overflow, Ford et al. (2016) 

found that impersonal interactions were the main 

factor that discouraged women from contributing. 

The women (N = 22) interviewed for the study 

cited three features of the platform that deterred 

them from contributing: (1) anonymity was seen to 

contribute to blunt and argumentative responses on 

posts, (2) invisibility of women leads to the site 

feeling like a ‘boy’s club’ full of ‘bro humor’ (Ford 

et al., 2016, p. 6), and (3) large communities are 

intimidating, and not possible in the same way 

offline. On Stack Overflow we can see a 

continuation of the theory that anonymous spaces 

lead to male-by-default interactions. The 

affordances of anonymity in Computer Mediated 

Communication (CMC) are evidently more 

beneficial to an ingroup, and attributes (or 

language) that might work for a majority group can 

be barriers for identifying with a community. 

Building on this, Ford et al. (2017, p. 1) conducted 

a second study where they developed the concept 

of peer parity: having similar individuals to 

compare oneself to in a space. The study found that 

the presence of female-identifying usernames on a 

thread increased the likelihood that a woman 

would engage actively with the Stack Overflow 

community (Ford et. al., 2017). When taken 

together, Terrell (2017) and Ford (2016; 2017) 

show that women hide their gender to participate, 

but this contributes to perceptions of a male-

dominated space. This in turn deters women from 

participating as they do not see anyone like 

themselves. For women, stereotype threat creates a 

cyclical self-fulfilling prophesy, as does anonymity 

in not seeing someone like me in technical spaces.  

5 Unlikely Allies 

The disparity of women’s representation in 

technical culture extends to those capable of 

computational methods, as only 15% of Data 

Scientists and computational researchers are 

women (Miller & Hughes, 2017). Comparatively, 

and estimated 75% of sociologists who focus on 

Gender are women (ASA, 2015). There are a 

number of notable exceptions to the trend, but this 

does not mean that the overall picture is 

endangered (See Ford 2016; 2017 as an example). 



175

Whilst Data Science may dismiss inequality and 

women’s lack of representation as a characteristic 

of the data, those who may provide insight are 

frequently not in the invited into the conversation. 

For Data Scientists, perchance it is not only the 

stereotype that girls can’t code, but maybe also 

gender theorists.  

Research has shown how valuable the social 

science lens is to computational fields (Kokkos & 

Tzouramanis, 2014; Nguyen, Doğruöz, Rosé, & de 

Jong, 2016; Otterbacher, 2013). Researchers at this 

intersection are aware of the tension between the 

theoretical framing and empirical methods of their 

work. Yet, whilst theory must begin with human-

orientated ideas, these notions are only valuable if 

they are confirmed through empirical methods. Far 

from incompatible, the value placed on creativity 

and predictive accuracy in computational fields is 

well matched to the esteemed validity and 

reliability of the social sciences (Nguyen et al, 

2016). This exciting and novel modus operandi is 

beginning to flourish in examining a range of 

inequalities online. 

In computational sociolinguistics text is social 

data, and the choice of language used signals a 

performed identity (Nguyen et al., 2016). In a 

traditional sociological framing, agency occurs in 

linguistic symbols as social currency. A struggle is 

evident here, as the parsimonious causality prized 

by quantitative and computational approaches 

meets the messiness of the social world. In 

computational sociolinguistics a balance needs to 

be sort between language reflecting additional 

social structures, and language arising from 

speaker agency (Nguyen et al., 2016). Put simply, 

not everyone writes in a way that reflects their 

biology, and thus the agency of speakers should be 

acknowledged in interpreting findings.  

As a case that exemplifies this argument,  

Otterbacher et al. (2013) examined the anonymous 

review site Internet Movie Database (IMDb) and 

found that women’s reviews were weight as having 

less utility than men’s. They also found that highly 

rated woman authors would exhibit “male” 

characteristics in their writing, such as less 

pronouns, complexity, and vocabulary richness 

(Otterbacher, 2013). The agency of the speakers is 

shown in the increased ‘maleness’ of language, as 

well as methodological evidence against biological 

determinism. Here, reputation voting systems of 

IMDb meant that female-based writing was 

downvoted. The reputation system  acts as a gender 

filter, in which the gender-majority dictates success 

(Herring et al, 2002). Gender structures clearly 

mediate online interactions even in contexts that 

are far less heavily associated with masculine 

stereotypes that computational cultures. 

The proposed study applies this conception that 

the male-majority dictates the identity performance 

required to succeed in a given social context and 

institutional setting (Risman, 2004). Looking to 

Stack Overflow, we propose that an estimated 89-

94% male majority fosters masculine linguistic 

repertories where those who don’t conform are 

punished with invisibility – colloquially referred to 

as being “downvoted into oblivion” (Clark-Gordon 

et al, 2017). As Hogan (2013) points out, 

conforming to a male-voice in order to successfully 

participate in a space is not a characteristic unique 

to computational culture or online forums. Take for 

instance the use of male pen names, the Brontë 

sisters were Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell and Mary 

Ann Evans who used the guise of George Eliot 

(Hogan, 2013). The implication here is that 

computational methods allow for the mapping of 

such phenomena. However, before introducing the 

proposed study, we must first consider how 

feminine and masculine speech used by both male 

and female authors complicates the simple binary 

understanding of gender operationalized in many 

computational studies.  

 

6 The trouble of operationalization 

In applying computation, it is crucial that the 

research design is aptly framed to not recreate 

inequalities. As noted earlier, gender is often 

treated as a latent attribute – a implicit assumption 

that linguistics choices are associated with distinct 

categories of people (Needle & Pierrehumbert, 

2018). The generalization of gender norms in 

computational research has been shown to 

contribute to stereotypes – seeing gender as 

something that people ‘have’ (not ‘do’), neglecting 

agency to mask ones gender. In defending the 

binary classification to gender it is  important to 

note that statistical definitions of the accuracy of 

predicative modelling does not mean that the 

picture is not oversimplified (Nguyen et al., 2016). 

Incorporating more critical understandings of 

gender may decrease predictive accuracy, but as it 

would include an understanding of socials 

structures the reproducibility of results may 

benefit. As gender social structures have 



176

consequences in interactions and infrastructure, a 

critical approach may not overfit a model to gender 

in a particular context.  To build on the aphorism of 

the statistician George Box, if ‘all models are 

wrong’, can adding critical gender theory make 

them more useful? 

 In discussing the apparently conflict 

paradigms of social theory and computational 

methods, Nguyen et al. (2016) point to the value 

placed on of construct validity in more critical 

approaches. For the uninitiated, construct validity 

is “extent to which the experimental design 

manages extraneous variance effectively” (Nguyen 

et al., 2016). This can be particular important in 

how gender is conceived of within a study. As we 

saw with Otterbacher et al.’s (2013) study into 

linguistic gender on IMDb, women who exhibited 

“maleness” in there speech were more highly rated. 

This shows that whilst a platform appears to be 

numerical equal, it can still be performatively and 

legitimately masculine. In not paying due attention 

to such confounding factors of gender social 

structures, may leave the results of an investigation 

to be weak, regardless of the number associated 

with predictive accuracy. Indeed, the social word is 

far messier than many predictive models may lead 

us to believe.  

Whilst computational studies into gender 

differences do valuable work to highlight the 

dearth of women in technical spaces, they can be 

guilty of perpetuating the underrepresentation. It 

can be dangerous to qualify contextual legitimacy 

or success in terms that are intrinsically gendered.  

In examining the open source development 

platform GitHub, Vedres and Vasarhelyi (2018) 

found that ‘disadvantage is a function of gendered 

behavior’. In the study the variable of femaleness 

was qualified by professional ties, level of activity 

(push/pull requests), and areas of specialization 

(Vedres & Vasarhelyi, 2018). The study argues that 

measures of reputation (‘success’ – as starred 

repositories) and survival (‘time account active’) 

on the platform were adversely affected by 

femaleness rather than by categorical 

discrimination. They found that not only was this 

true for women, but men and users with 

unidentifiable gender are also likely to suffer for 

exhibiting behavior that demonstrated femaleness. 

The findings of Vedres and Vasarhelyi (2018) are 

valuable as they show that behavior classified as 

feminine adversely effects one’s status (in their 

defined terms), not just listing ‘female’ on a profile. 

Nonetheless, as is typical of gender classification 

studies, the ‘behavioral’ aspect was built from an 

extrapolation of categorical gender. That is, the 

features that are defined as ‘femaleness’, are built 

from behavior associated with a ‘female’ 

(categorically defined) account. Thus, the causality 

of gendered performance versus identification is 

unclear, and not supported by critical studies. The 

assertion made here that “women are at a 

disadvantage because of what they do, rather than 

because of who they are” (Vedres & Vasarhelyi, 

2018) oversimplifies acting as a women and being 

a women into discrete and mutually exclusive 

categories. Nevertheless, that study shows that the 

default masculinity is ratified through behavior that 

generates contextual ‘success’, rather than by the 

overt presence of men. Vedres & Vasarhelyi's 

(2018) project reflects one of the significant 

challenges of critical research with computational 

methods: the operationalization of gender as a 

variable in manner that does conflate masculinity 

with community’s definition of success.  

 

7 Beyond the binary 

As illustrated above, gender as a binary can miss 

some vital aspects of community functioning and 

belonging. As interactions dictate how men and 

women can act even in identical structural 

positions, gender can define the capacity for action 

in a given environment. For instance, Cheryan et 

al. (2009) found that exposure to stereotypical 

masculine computer science environments actively 

deters women from participating, even when the 

space was populated by women. Extending this, 

work by Ford and Wajcman (2017) & Schwartz 

and Neff (2019) shows that the social structures of 

gender permeate online spaces, as technology’s 

design and use draws on the cultural and 

institutional repertoires in a male dominated space.  

Whilst incorporated in many traditionally 

critical gender studies, going beyond a binary 

understanding can prove challenging to 

quantitative and computational research. How can 

gender be operationalized into a variable that 

accounts for a myriad of gender performances? 

Much work relies on the idea that the majority of 

individuals consider gender a binary, so therefore 

it is binary in studying the social phenomena in 

which said individuals participate. Whilst there is 

merit to this rationale, there are simple 

computational methods that can be used to negate 



177

a constrained and binary understanding of gender. 

A promising technique is that of Cluster Analysis. 

In clustering observations are grouped based on 

similarity, and to show the difference between 

different groups. Clustering is an unsupervised 

Machine Learning technique commonly used to 

gain valuable insights for patterns in data.  

In their study into gender, networks, and 

linguistic style on Twitter, Bamman et al (2014) 

propose a more nuanced approach to quantitative 

work on gender. They point to how measures of 

predictive accuracy do not mean that the model 

does not distort the social world. Building on 

Butler’s (1990) casting of gender, they take a two 

step approach to modelling gender. 

 

Step 1: Predict gender with a Logit model using 

lexical features (i.e. Dictionary words, slang, 

taboo, hashtags) 

Step 2: Group authors by similarity in word 

usage and look at the gender breakdown of each 

cluster. 

By looking at which words and lexical features 

are most associated with users that profile states 

their gender in Step 1, Bamman et al (2014) take a 

situated approach to meaning. The stylized 

reputation of acts that are make up a gender 

performance vary by context. For instance, if a 

individual swears, the way that profanity is 

received by a audience will depends on the 

characteristics of the speaker (gender, ethnicity, 

age) and the context in which they are speaking 

(with friends, family dinner, classroom) and the 

role they are acting (policeman, mother, priest). As 

such, a perspective that incorporates situated 

meaning is the only way to understand the 

relationship between gender and language. In Step 

2 of Bamman et al’s (2014) study, Twitter users 

were grouped by similarities in word usage. Using 

a clustering algorithm based on the Expectation-

Maximization framework, the clusters were built 

without considering gender yet had strong gender 

majorities. This approach to clustering allowed for 

multiple expressions of gender, which the authors 

speculate may be related to an interaction between 

age or ethnicity (Bamman et al., 2014). Conducting 

research in this manner, with gender not treated as 

the response variable, allowed for findings that 

were unexpected. For example, whilst taboo terms 

were generally shown to be preferred by men, 

several male-associated cultures reversed this trend 

(Bamman et al., 2014). Overall, the clustering 

methodology of this study incorporates the social 

relation of “male” and “female” categories, going 

beyond descriptive understandings and 

acknowledging the normative gender 

performances that define inclusion and exclusion.  

Whilst this is not a perfect approach, it does 

highlight the possibility of clustering to examine 

how social identity can be evident in data without 

being determined by demographic markers.  

However antithetical they may seem, critical 

gender studies and computational methods can be 

unlikely, and valuable, allies.  

8 Stack Overflow: A Research Agenda 

Often referred to as the ‘programmer’s 

paradise’, Stack Overflow is the largest online 

community of coding knowledge, boasting 9.9 

million registered users and 50 million monthly 

visitors, of whom 21 million are professional 

developers and university-level students (Ford et 

al., 2016).Yet, with an estimated population of only 

6-11% women, the popular platform is only 

paradise for some. The approach uses on Butler’s 

conception of gender as enacted, incorporating 

situational meaning (Lea and Spears’ 1991) and 

considering discourse-in-context, as argued for by 

Needle and Pierrehumbert (2018), Buckoltz (1999) 

and Lamerichs & Te Molder (2003). Building on 

the work of Adam (2003), Edwards (2003), 

Tanczer (2015), and Sollfrank (1999, 2002), this 

study examines the visibility of gender in 

accessible technical spaces. Through a twostep 

process of Natural Language Process, Machine 

Learning (sklearn), and Cluster Analysis 

(Expectation-Maximization framework), as used 

by Bamman et al (2014), I will analyse linkages 

between masculine-linguistic practise and 

reputation building.  

A significant portion of the contribution of the 

study will be methodological, as I aim to provide a 

simple road map by which critical research can be 

conducted with computational methods, 

accounting for levels of gender visibility. In 

exploring this, I ask how visible gender is on Stack 

Overflow, and what situational meaning imbues 

text with hostility. 

 



178

8.1 Data Collection 

In first setting out the data for analysis, I will use 

the Stack Overflow data dump, hosted on Google 

BigQuery.  Separated into different tables, the 

information available is posts, users, votes, 

comments, posts history, and post links. Updated 

on a quarterly basis, the BigQuery dataset includes 

an archive of Stack Overflow’s user-contributed 

content, including posts, votes, tags, and badges. 

This dataset is updated to mirror the Stack 

Overflow content on the Internet Archive and is 

also available through the Stack Exchange Data 

Explorer. Inherent in this data are several 

challenges of working with big data (~180GB), 

such as different features of a post stored in 

separate tables (i.e. ‘tags’, accepted answers, post 

content). The Data Dump also contains substantial 

metadata, meaning data that provides a description 

of information in the dataset, such as suggested 

edits and location of users. Datasets such as this 

provide a wealth of information and contextual 

CMC that is underutilized in social science 

research. I will use the location of users to narrow 

my population to the USA and UK. Whilst this 

does lead to a Western-focused dataset, it also 

means that I am not homogenizing gender 

performances across cultural contexts.  

 

8.2 Rudeness and Offence 

On the Stack Overflow dataset, I propose to 

examine how visible gender and what forms 

hostility can take in context. Informing my analysis 

with Meta Stack Overflow, I will examine what 

practices are considered hostile and reduce the 

visibility (peer parity – Ford et al, 2016) of women 

on the platform. In taking a local and contextual 

approach to hostile behavior on Stack Overflow 

candidate features for inclusion were informed by 

the results of the 2019 Developers Survey and a 

forum dedicated to studying the research site, Meta 

Stack Overflow. I will incorporate 

formal/structural measures of hostility, such as the 

“Offensive Comment” tag. I will additionally 

include a subtler element in ascertaining what 

terms and practices are most associated with this 

tag. Contextual features that have so far emerged 

form a reading of  Meta Stack Overflow include 

ratio of code to text, and references to “reading the 

documentation” in short answers or “not doing 

your homework for you”, and similar sentiments. 

The candidate features for inclusion thus reference 

local and contextual understandings of hostility.  

 

8.3 Gender as Tiers 

In examining gender as a social structure, I 

propose to account for both those who clearly 

identify their gender on their profile as well as 

those who purposefully obscure it to participate 

without facing gendered social sanctions. I propose 

three-tier classifications of gender to map onto the 

results of the cluster analysis.  
 

(1) Self-identified Male or Female: Identified 

as a man/woman clearly through their profile 

(Gender, About Me, Name),  

(2) Linguistically Masculine or Feminine: 

Estimated through a bag-of-word approach 

using the posts/comments associated with tier 1 

(3) Neutral: Unidentified profiles (those users 

who fall under the conventionally defined 0.8 

confidence of tier 2) 
 

Through this distinction, my investigation will not 

conflate those who identify a gender, with those 

who perform it. As Otterbacher et al. (2013) show, 

“maleness” characteristics in speech does not mean 

that the speaker identifies as a man. This 

differentiation between claiming and hiding a 

gender identity in technical cultures will not only 

be beneficial in terms of building a representative 

model, but also in not seeing unidentified data as 

just noise, but rather a potentially purposeful act. 

These gender classifications will be mapped onto 

hostility and reputation to see the relationship 

between gender identification, linguistic-gender 

and legitimate participation. 

Therefore, I will use NLP and clustering 

techniques to ascertain the gender dimensions of 

hostile behavior on Stack Overflow, and how this 

can lead to women’s lack of participation. The 

output of the study will be a categorization of 

gendered behaviors that mark the space as 

masculine and create cultural barriers for women’s 

entry into coding forums, even in the anonymous 

space of programmer’s paradise. 

 

Bibliography 

Adams, G., Garcia, D. M., Purdie-Vaughns, V., & 

Steele, C. M. (2006). The detrimental effects of 

a suggestion of sexism in an instruction 

situation. Journal of Experimental Social 

Psychology, 42(5), 602–615. 



179

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2005.10.004 

Allen, B. J. (1995). Gender and Computer-Mediated 

Communication. Sex Roles (Vol. 32). 

ASA. (2015). ASA Sections: Membership by Gender 

| American Sociological Association. Retrieved 

June 2, 2019, from 

https://www.asanet.org/research-and-

publications/research-sociology/trends/asa-

sections-membership-gender 

Bamman, D., Eisenstein, J., & Schnoebelen, T. 

(2014). Gender identity and lexical variation in 

social media 1. Journal of Sociolinguistics 

(Vol. 18). 

Bucholtz, M. (1999). “ Why be normal ?” Language 

and identity practices in a community of nerd 

girls Answer the following questions in small 

groups. Language in Society, 28, 203–223. 

Bucholtz, Mary, & Hall, K. (2005, October 1). 

Identity and interaction: A sociocultural 

linguistic approach. Discourse Studies. SAGE 

PublicationsLondon, Thousand Oaks, CA and 

New Delhi. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1461445605054407 

Butler, J. (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the 

Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge. 

https://doi.org/10.1057/fr.1991.33 

Cheryan, S., Plaut, V. C., Davies, P. G., & Steele, C. 

M. (2009). Ambient Belonging: How 

Stereotypical Cues Impact Gender Participation 

in Computer Science. Journal of Personality 

and Social Psychology, 97(6), 1045–1060. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016239 

Clark-Gordon, C. V., Workman, K. E., & Linvill, D. 

L. (2017). College students and yik yak: An 

exploratory mixed-methods study. Social Media 

and Society, 3(2). 

https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305117715696 

Edwards, P. (2003). Nerd Worlds: Computer hackers, 

unofficial culture and mascu line identities, 

[unpublished paper]. Program in Science, 

Technology and Society, Sta Nford University, 

Stanford, CA. 

Ford, D., Smith, J., Guo, P. J., & Parnin, C. (2016). 

Paradise unplugged: identifying barriers for 

female participation on stack overflow. In 

Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT 

International Symposium on Foundations of 

Software Engineering - FSE 2016 (pp. 846–

857). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2950331 

Ford, H., & Wajcman, J. (2017). ‘Anyone can edit’, 

not everyone does: Wikipedia’s infrastructure 

and the gender gap. Social Studies of Science, 

47(4), 511–527. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312717692172 

Herring, S., Job-Sluder, K., Scheckler, R., & Barab, 

S. (2002). Searching for Safety Online: 

Managing “Trolling” in a Feminist Forum. The 

Information Society, 18(5), 371–384. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/01972240290108186 

Hogan, B. (2013). Pseudonyms and the Rise of the 

Real-Name Web. In A Companion to New 

Media Dynamics (pp. 290–307). Blackwell 

Publishing Ltd. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118321607.ch18 

Kendall, L. (2011). “White and Nerdy”: Computers, 

Race, and the Nerd Stereotype. Journal of 

Popular Culture, 44(3), 505–524. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-

5931.2011.00846.x 

Kokkos, A., & Tzouramanis, T. (2014). A robust 

gender inference model for online social 

networks ad its application o LinkedIn and 

Twitter. First Monday, 19(9). 

https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v19i9.5216 

Lamerichs, J., & Te Molder, H. F. M. (2003). 

Computer-mediated communication: from a 

cognitive to a discursive model (Vol. 5). 

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning : 

legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge 

University Press. 

Lea, M., & Spears, R. (1991). Computer-mediated 

communication, de-individuation and group 

decision-making. International Journal of Man-

Machine Studies, 34(2), 283–301. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-7373(91)90045-9 

Massanari, A. L. (2015). Participatory Culture, 

Community, and Play: learning from reddit. 

Oxford: Peter Lang. 

Miller, S., & Hughes, D. (2017). The Quant Crunch: 

How The Demand for Data Science Skills Is 

Disrupting the Job Market. BurningGlass, IBM 

(Vol. 41). 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0032258x6804100305 

Needle, J. M., & Pierrehumbert, J. B. (2018). 

Gendered associations of English morphology. 

Laboratory Phonology: Journal of the 

Association for Laboratory Phonology, 9(1), 1–

23. https://doi.org/10.5334/labphon.134 

Nguyen, D. ., Doğruöz, A. S. ., Rosé, C. P. ., & de 

Jong, F. . (2016). Computational 

sociolinguistics: A survey. Computational 

Linguistics, 42(3), 537–593. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/COLI_a_00258 

Nic Giolla Easpaig, B., & Humphrey, R. (2016). 

“Pitching a virtual woo”: Analysing discussion 

of sexism in online gaming. Feminism & 

Psychology, 0(0), 1–9. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0959353516667400 



180

Otterbacher, J. (2013). Gender, writing and ranking in 

review forums: a case study of the IMDb. 

Knowledge and Information Systems, 35(3), 

645–664. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-012-

0548-z 

Risman, B. J. (2004). Gender as a social structure: 

Theory wrestling with activism. Gender and 

Society. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243204265349 

Robin, L. (1973). Language and Woman ’ s Place. 

Cambridge University Press, 2(1), 45–80. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0047404500000051 

Schwartz, B., & Neff, G. (2019). The gendered 

affordances of Craigslist “new-in-town girls 

wanted” ads. New Media & Society, 

146144481984989. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444819849897 

Shifman, L., & Lemish, D. (2011). “Mars and venus” 

in virtual space: Post-feminist humor and the 

internet. Critical Studies in Media 

Communication, 28(3), 253–273. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/15295036.2010.522589 

Sollfrank, C. (1999). Women Hackers: A report from 

the mission to locate subversive women on the 

net. Cyberfeminist International. 

Sollfrank, C. (2002). Not every hacker is a woman. 

Retrieved April 28, 2017, from 

http://www.obn.org/reading_room/writings/htm

l/notevery.html 

Stack Overflow. (2019). Stack Overflow Developer 

Survey 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2019, from 

https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2019 

Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (2000). Stereotype threat 

and the intellectual test performance of African 

Americans. 

Tanczer, L. M. (2015). Hacktivism and the male-only 

stereotype. New Media & Society, 1–17. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814567983 

Terrell, J., Kofink, A., Middleton, J., Rainear, C., 

Murphy-Hill, E., Parnin, C., & Stallings, J. 

(2017). Gender differences and bias in open 

source: pull request acceptance of women 

versus men. PeerJ Computer Science, 3, e111. 

https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.111 

Vedres, B., & Vasarhelyi, O. (2018). Gendered 

behavior as a disadvantage in open source 

software development. 

 


