




















































Cross-Linguistic Semantic Annotation: Reconciling the Language-Specific and the Universal


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 1–14
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1

Cross-Lingual Semantic Annotation: Reconciling the Language-Specific
and the Universal

Jens E. L. Van Gysel, Meagan Vigus, Pavlina Kalm,
Sook-kyung Lee, Michael Regan, William Croft

MSC 03 2130 Linguistics
1 University of New Mexico

Albuquerque NM 87131-0001, USA
{jelvangysel,mvigus,pavlinap,sklee,reganman,wcroft}@unm.edu

Abstract

Developers of cross-lingual semantic annota-
tion schemes face a number of issues not en-
countered in monolingual annotation. This
paper discusses four such issues, related to
the establishment of annotation labels, and the
treatment of languages with more fine-grained,
more coarse-grained, and cross-cutting cate-
gories. We propose that a lattice-like archi-
tecture of the annotation categories can ade-
quately handle all four issues, and at the same
time remain both intuitive for annotators and
faithful to typological insights. This position
is supported by a brief annotation experiment.

1 Introduction

In recent years, the field of computational lin-
guistics has become increasingly interested in an-
notation schemes with cross-lingual applicability
(Ponti et al., 2018). For syntactic annotation, the
Universal Dependencies scheme for grammatical
relations between constituents (Nivre et al., 2016)
is probably the best-known representative of this
new tendency.

On the semantic side, various annotation
schemes have been proposed for specific concep-
tual domains. The Abstract Meaning Represen-
tation project (Banarescu et al., 2013) aims to
provide a language-neutral representation of ar-
gument structure, and was shown by Xue et al.
(2014) to have potential in this direction. The Uni-
versal Conceptual Cognitive Annotation (Abend
and Rappoport, 2013) has the same objective. An-
notation schemes designed for cross-lingual appli-
cation have also been proposed for such semantic
domains as the meanings of discourse connectives
(Zufferey and Degand, 2017), temporal informa-
tion (Katz and Arosio, 2001; Pustejovsky et al.,
2003), epistemicity (Lavid et al., 2016), modality
in general (Nissim et al., 2013), and preposition-
like senses (Saint-Dizier, 2006).

However, languages diverge widely in the se-
mantic distinctions they conventionally express,
and in the formal means they use to do so (Comrie,
1989; Croft, 2002). Therefore, devising a cross-
lingual annotation scheme poses challenges that
developers of language-specific schemes need not
face. This paper discusses some crucial choices
developers of cross-lingual semantic annotation
schemes must make with regards to the granular-
ity of linguistic categories. To a large extent, these
apply to syntactic annotation as well. In particu-
lar, the following four issues need to be accounted
for by any annotation scheme with cross-linguistic
ambitions:

1. What are the values of the basic labels of the
semantic annotation scheme, i.e. which dis-
tinctions are annotators expected to make?

2. How are languages with more coarse-grained
semantic distinctions accommodated?

3. How are languages with more fine-grained
semantic distinctions accommodated?

4. How are languages with distinctions that
cross-cut the categories distinguished in the
base level annotation scheme treated?

Section 2 of this paper discusses these issues in
more detail, exemplifying each of them with data
from a range of semantic domains and a range of
languages, and section 3 provides a brief overview
of how previous cross-lingual annotation schemes
have treated them. In section 4, we survey a
wider range of possible solutions for these chal-
lenges, each with their advantages and drawbacks,
and make an argument in favour of establishing
a lattice-like structure of hierarchically organized,
typologically motivated categories. We also pro-
pose a set of guidelines for annotators on which
levels of this lattice to use. Section 5 presents an
exploratory cross-lingual annotation exercise us-
ing such an architecture.



2

2 Issues in Cross-Lingual Annotation

When devising an annotation scheme for a se-
mantic domain, one must carve up this region
of conceptual space into discrete subregions.
For a monolingual scheme, one can straightfor-
wardly base these annotation values on distinc-
tions overtly made in the language. One is likely
to run into trouble, however, trying to apply such
monolingual categories to a wider sample of lan-
guages.

For example, Zufferey and Degand (2017) and
Zufferey et al. (2012) have shown that the English-
based feature set for the semantics of discourse
connectives used by the Penn Discourse Tree Bank
(Prasad et al., 2008) needed to be refined when
applying it to closely related languages such as
French, German, Dutch and Italian. Divergences
are expected to be even larger when applying a
monolingual scheme to genetically unrelated lan-
guages. This section discusses how one can de-
vise a principled cross-linguistic set of labels, and
make allowances for languages that do not fit it.

2.1 Establishing the Categories

We propose two heuristics to help one decide on
a subdivision of a semantic domain with maximal
cross-linguistic applicability. Firstly, choosing se-
mantic categories distinguished by the majority of
languages in the world naturally makes the labels
of the annotation scheme widely applicable.

For example, Boye (2012) finds that the typo-
logically most common way in which languages
subdivide the conceptual domain of epistemic
strength, defined as “judgements about the fac-
tual status of a proposition” (Palmer, 2001), is a
three-way distinction between full support (cer-
tainty about the reality status of an event), partial
support (less than certain knowledge about the re-
ality status of an event), and neutral support (non-
commitment as to the reality status of an event).1

Similarly, in the domain of entity quantifica-
tion, a simple singular vs. non-singular distinc-
tion is highly common in the languages of the
world (Corbett, 2000). In a cross-lingual anno-
tation scheme for these semantic domains, choos-
ing [FULL, PARTIAL, NEUTRAL] and [SINGULAR,

1In keeping with general typological practice, semantic
concepts are capitalized in the text when they are language-
specific, and are written with a lower-case first letter when
they have cross-linguistic reference. Labels for annotation
categories are represented in small caps.

NON-SINGULAR] as basic annotation categories
allows most languages to be felicitously analyzed.

A second, practical rather than theoretical, cri-
terion for establishing the main annotation cat-
egories is the ease of making the semantic dis-
tinctions regardless of the language of annotation.
When developers assert that their chosen cate-
gories are cross-linguistically applicable, they im-
plicitly argue that they are interpretable even for
speakers of languages which do not make them.
They also need to provide sufficiently clear guide-
lines for annotators of many if not all languages
to successfully implement them. In the temporal
domain, for instance, this would be an argument
for an annotation scheme to adopt distinctions be-
tween [PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE]. Such cate-
gories are both highly salient in our real-world ex-
perience, and can be defined in a non-ambiguous
way. Therefore, even though some languages
(such as Mandarin) lack grammaticalized means
to express these categories, one can reasonably as-
sume that annotators will be able to annotate sen-
tences for past, present, or future time reference
based on contextual information.

2.2 More Coarse-Grained Distinctions
Not all languages will make the semantic distinc-
tions chosen by the developers as the base values
for a conceptual domain. One way in which lan-
guages can diverge from them is by lumping to-
gether distinctions, i.e. dividing up this region of
conceptual space in a more coarse-grained way.

In the domain of modality, for instance, Boye
(2012) finds languages that use more coarse-
grained distinctions than [FULL, PARTIAL, NEU-
TRAL]. Southern Nambiquara lumps together
partial and neutral support, making a two-way
distinction within verbal suffixes (Boye, 2012,
p. 99). This two-way distinction corresponds to
full (“Declarative”) vs. non-full (“Dubitative”)
epistemic strength. In the temporal domain, Hua
shows a Future vs. Non-Future distinction, lump-
ing together past and present (Haiman, 1980), as
do many other languages. One may want the an-
notation scheme to allow for flexibility beyond the
use of the base categories to accommodate such
languages.

2.3 More Fine-Grained Distinctions
Languages can also subdivide conceptual space in
more specific ways than the chosen annotation cat-
egories. In the number domain, for instance, more



3

fine-grained distinctions within the non-singular
region of conceptual space can be made. Lan-
guages may distinguish sets of two entities from
sets of more than two entities (Dual vs. Plural, Up-
per Sorbian); sets of two entities, sets of three en-
tities and sets of more than three entities (Dual vs.
Trial vs. Plural, Larike); or “small” sets of enti-
ties from “large” sets of entities (Paucal vs. Plural,
Bayso, Corbett 2000, chapter 2). In the domain
of modality, Limbu (Sino-Tibetan) subdivides the
Partial category into Weak Partial and Strong Par-
tial support (Boye, 2012).

These cases do not necessarily form problems
for an annotation scheme. Since the more fine-
grained categories discussed here are all neatly
categorized as subdivisions of the chosen basic an-
notation categories, annotators are expected to be
able to identify the correct category label without
problems. Nevertheless, in order to preserve as
much information as possible, it may be desirable
to provide annotators with a way to use more fine-
grained categories made in their language instead
of (or in addition to) the pre-established category
values.

2.4 Cross-Cutting Distinctions

The largest challenge to cross-lingual annotation
schemes is posed by languages which divide se-
mantic space in ways that cross-cut, or overlap
with, the pre-established categories. This will in-
evitably be the case in semantic domains that form
a continuum which has to be carved up into dis-
crete values for the annotation labels. Examples
of such categories can once again be found in the
modality and number domains.

Boye (2012), based on data from Craig (1977),
shows that Jacaltec distinguishes only Strong Sup-
port (chubil) and Weak Support (tato) in its com-
plementizers. Strong Support corresponds to
the cross-linguistic prototype of full support and
strong partial support, while Weak Support corre-
sponds to the cross-linguistic prototype of neutral
support and weak partial support. In other words,
these categories cross-cut the partial support cat-
egory. For a sentence containing the Weak Sup-
port marker, an annotator who wishes to adhere to
the proposed category labels must judge whether
it falls under the NEUTRAL or PARTIAL category
- a judgement they cannot make based on explicit
evidence from the language.

Similarly, a small number of languages (e.g.

Ainu, Eastern Pomo) make a Few vs. Many dis-
tinction in the number domain rather than a Singu-
lar vs. Non-Singular one (Veselinova, 2013). They
have one category that refers to single referents or
small groups (typically up to a maximum of three
for Ainu), and a different one to refer to groups
greater than this number - dividing up the semantic
space in a different, rather than more fine-grained
or more coarse-grained, way than the categories
found in the majority of languages. In such situa-
tions, it is difficult to guide annotators on what to
do when they encounter such an overlapping cate-
gory.

3 Related Work

Previous cross-lingual annotation schemes have
not often explicitly addressed the issues laid out in
section 2. One scheme accounting for at least two
of these issues is Zufferey and Degand’s (2017)
multilingual adaptation of the PDTB guidelines
for discourse connectives. Establishing a hierar-
chical set of annotation labels based on a small
sample of genetically related languages allows
them to deal with more fine-grained and more
coarse-grained distinctions. Individual annotators
are allowed to freely choose values from any level
in the hierarchy. When a language divides the se-
mantic domain up in a more fine-grained way, an-
notators can simply choose values from lower lev-
els of the hierarchy, while for languages with more
coarse-grained categories, annotators can choose
categories higher up in the structure.

When a given markable is either ambiguous be-
tween two pre-established categories, or semanti-
cally intermediate between them, they allow an-
notators to annotate the markable with two tags.
Implicitly, this seems meant to solve the problem
of cross-cutting categories outlined in 2.4. It does
not, however, capture the typological insight that
many semantic domains are internally structured
and can be captured in semantic maps (Haspel-
math, 2003). We know, for example, that in the
domain of modality, it should be exceedingly rare
if not impossible for a language to show a seman-
tic category subsuming full and neutral support,
but not partial support. Therefore, allowing anno-
tators to freely combine annotation labels seems to
be too unconstrained of a mechanism to deal with
cross-linguistic variation in category boundaries.

Other cross-lingual annotation schemes (e.g.
UCCA, Abend and Rappoport 2013; SSA, Grif-



4

fitt et al. 2018), aim to keep the scheme as intu-
itive as possible while maintaining cross-linguistic
comparability. To this end, UCCA only pro-
vides highly schematic annotation categories on
the order of [PARTICIPANT, TEMPORAL RELA-
TION, EVENT]. These categories are so general
that no language would have more coarse-grained
categories. Because of their high level of abstrac-
tion, they are also so far apart in conceptual space
that languages are unlikely to show overlapping
categories. On the other hand, every language will
have more fine-grained categories than provided in
this scheme. These are not annotated in the base
level UCCA, but left to additional annotation lay-
ers which researchers can develop for their own
purposes.

Lavid et al. (2016) use a similar approach to
Zufferey and Degand (2017). They provide a hi-
erarchical structure with three levels of categories
for annotating epistemicity, encouraging the use
of the lowest levels. When in doubt between
the lower-level categories, annotators can choose
a higher-level category instead. Nissim et al.’s
(2013) cross-lingual scheme for modality also al-
lows annotators to choose coarse-grained cate-
gories if they are not confident judging an utter-
ance as an instance of a lower-level category.

While this solution works for languages with
coarse-grained categories, strict hierarchical ar-
chitectures do not allow for easy annotation of
overlapping categories. For example, while both
these annotation schemes distinguish values for
[CERTAINTY, PROBABILITY, POSSIBILITY], the
immediately higher-level category is simply one
of EPISTEMIC MODAL/FACTUALITY. There is no
way to capture categories like those of Jacaltec
where some cases of PROBABILITY group with
CERTAINTY and others with POSSIBILITY.

4 Potential Solutions

We believe that the most promising architecture
for a cross-lingual semantic annotation scheme is
to structure the typologically motivated labels as
a lattice with different levels, rather than a strict
hierarchy. One level contains the categories orig-
inally chosen based on the criteria set out in 2.1.
This level is designated as the “base level”: anno-
tators are encouraged to use categories from this
level as the default. The higher and lower levels,
respectively, contain equally typologically moti-
vated coarser-grained and finer-grained categories,

which can be used when called for by certain ap-
plications or certain language-specific categoriza-
tions. Such lattices capture the idea that many
semantic categories are structured as hierarchical
scales, where the middle values can group together
with either end, but the extremes of the scale are
highly unlikely to be categorized together in any
language. Illustrations are provided in figure 1 and
figure 2, and in the supplementary materials.

Epistemic

Strength

Non-neutral

Non-full

Partial

Full

Neutral

Strong partial

Weak partial

Strong neutral

Weak neutral

Figure 1: Annotation lattice for epistemic strength

Number

Singular

Non-singular
Paucal

Plural

Non-dual
Paucal

Dual

Greater
Plural

Trial

Non-trial
Paucal

Figure 2: Annotation lattice for number

4.1 More Coarse-Grained Categories

If a language has more coarse-grained semantic
categories in a certain domain than those provided
in the base level of the lattice (in bold in figures
1-2), it might be difficult for annotators to judge
which label to apply to a given use of such a cate-
gory. For example, for any use of the Nambiquara
Dubitative, one would have to judge whether it ex-
presses NEUTRAL or PARTIAL support. This could
lead to increased disagreements between annota-
tors. On the one hand, one may still want to re-
quire annotators to adopt the base level categories.
On the other hand, one might want to ease the an-
notation process for annotators of languages like
Nambiquara.

The lattice architecture allows both goals to
be met. As seen in figure 1, [FULL, PARTIAL]
strength form an overlapping NON-NEUTRAL cat-
egory; [PARTIAL, NEUTRAL] strength group to-
gether as NON-FULL. Following the aforemen-
tioned typological insight, no category groups to-
gether [FULL, NEUTRAL] to the exclusion of PAR-
TIAL. Such a lattice avoids the drawback of a
strict hierarchy in that it allows for flexibility in



5

the treatment of the in-between category, which
can group with either FULL or NEUTRAL support.

For each use of the Nambiquara Dubitative,
then, annotators would be encouraged to judge
whether in context it expresses PARTIAL or NEU-
TRAL support. If such a judgement is too hard to
make, annotators may use higher-level values in
the lattice, in this case NON-FULL.

4.2 More Fine-Grained Categories
Even though annotators of languages with more
fine-grained distinctions than the main level of
the lattice should be able to accurately use this
level, they may, with an eye on certain down-
stream applications, want to preserve more spe-
cific information encoded in the language. In
the Universal Dependencies scheme, annotators
are able to add lower-level language-specific cate-
gories where needed (e.g. Pyysalo et al. 2015 for
Finnish). In order to eliminate the potential prolif-
eration of incommensurable language-specific cat-
egories that could result from this, we would en-
courage annotators to use the base level values as
much as possible. In addition, we would provide a
set of typologically-based fine-grained categories
on a lower level of the lattice. In figure 1, this cor-
responds to the [STRONG PARTIAL, WEAK PAR-
TIAL, STRONG NEUTRAL, WEAK NEUTRAL] la-
bels, in figure 2 to the [PAUCAL, PLURAL] labels
and all labels subsumed underneath them.

In example (1a) from Limbu (van Driem, 1987,
p. 244), annotators could follow the distinctions
the language makes by labeling the epistemic
marker li·ya as WEAK PARTIAL. In (1b), they can
label laPba as STRONG PARTIAL. Similarly, anno-
tators for a language with fine-grained number cat-
egories, such as Yimas, could use the lower-level
categories in figure 2. The Yimas Dual, used for
reference to exactly two entities, can be marked
as DUAL. The Yimas Paucal (typically used for
reference to sets containing three to seven entities,
Foley, 1991, p. 111) can be marked as NON-DUAL
PAUCAL.

(1) a. ya·Pl
groan

li·ya.
EPMOD

‘He’s perhaps groaning.’
b. ya·Pl

groan
laPba.
EPMOD

‘He’s probably groaning.’

In this way, the specific information expressed
in these forms is preserved. At the same time,

comparability to other languages is safeguarded:
because of the structure of the lattice, lower-level
annotations can be traced back, e.g. to the NON-
SINGULAR base level category for the DUAL la-
bel, and to the PARTIAL category for the STRONG
PARTIAL label, and compared to instances of this
category in other languages.

Annotators may, in addition, encounter typo-
logically rare fine-grained categories that do not
correspond to a pre-specified value in the lattice.
They are encouraged in these cases to use base
level categories from the lattice. If they feel very
strongly that this is not sufficient for their pur-
poses, they will be able to create a language-
specific semantic label and specify its position in
the lattice.

4.3 Cross-Cutting Categories
Languages with categories that cross-cut the dis-
tinctions in the lattice, such as the Jacaltec Strong
Support vs. Weak Support system, are the hardest
to deal with. The Few vs. Many verbal number
system of Ainu, (typically called “Singular” and
“Plural”, Veselinova 2013), also shows this (2).
Ek ‘come’ is used with a set of one to four par-
ticipants, arki ‘come’ is used with more than four
participants (Tamura 1988, p. 40) - cross-cutting
the [SINGULAR, NON-SINGULAR] distinction.

(2) a. tu
two

okkaypo
youth

ek.
come.SG

‘Two youths came.’
b. tupesaniw

eight
ka
even

arki
come.PL

ruwe
NMLZ

ne.
COP

‘Eight people came.’

We present four options for the annotation of
such cross-cutting categories, and argue that the
fourth one strikes the best balance between ease
of annotation and cross-lingual portability. Firstly,
one could allow annotators to completely fol-
low the distinctions their language makes. This
would mean that Ainu annotators would estab-
lish a FEW category, subsuming the [SINGULAR,
DUAL, TRIAL] categories in the lattice, and a
MANY category, subsuming [NON-TRIAL PAU-
CAL, PLURAL]. Alternatively, these categories
could be named SINGULAR and PLURAL, since
they spread outwards from the cross-linguistic sin-
gular and plural prototypes. Along the same lines,
Jacaltec annotators would establish a STRONG (or
FULL) category for chubil and a WEAK (or NEU-
TRAL) category for tato.



6

This option gives maximal advantage to anno-
tators, who can make use of the exact distinctions
expressed in their language. They would not have
to distinguish between the different uses of these
forms.2 It comes, however, with a great reduction
in cross-linguistic comparability of the resulting
annotations. Either the same semantic value will
come to be annotated differently in different lan-
guages (partial epistemic support would be anno-
tated as PARTIAL in most languages but as either
FULL or NEUTRAL in Jacaltec), or the same anno-
tation would mean different things in different lan-
guages (SINGULAR would mean “exactly one en-
tity” in Yimas, but “one to three entities” in Ainu).

The second option is a weakened version of the
first. Under this approach, the primary annotation
of each form is the prototype of this category, but
annotators are expected to add the accurate cate-
gory of the more fine-grained level of the lattice as
a secondary annotation.

The Ainu form ek would, then, be annotated as
SINGULAR:SINGULAR when referring to the com-
ing of one entity, and SINGULAR:NON-SINGULAR
when referring to the coming of two or three en-
tities. The first SINGULAR refers to the fact that
the cross-linguistic singular category is the proto-
type of the semantic category expressed by Ainu
ek. The second annotation expresses the actual se-
mantic value of an utterance on the base level of
the annotation lattice. As for modality, Jacaltec
annotators would annotate strong partial and full
support uses of chubil as FULL:STRONG PARTIAL
and FULL:FULL respectively.

While this is probably fairly intuitive for anno-
tators, the drawback is that labels such as STRONG
PARTIAL no longer exclusively belong to one over-
arching category. In Jacaltec, it would belong un-
der FULL, while in other languages it would fall
under PARTIAL. As a result, annotators for lan-
guages with a canonical strong partial vs. weak
partial distinction, as proper subcategories of the
base level partial support category, would consis-
tently have to employ a secondary annotation as
well, specifying the overarching PARTIAL to make
the value of this annotation clear. The necessity
for two annotation labels to be selected for each

2It must be kept in mind, however, that many formal
grammatical categories in languages are polysemous. In se-
mantic annotation, annotators must be wary of labeling ex-
pressions in a deterministic way based on the most prototypi-
cal use of a grammatical marker. Instead, each utterance must
be judged based on its meaning in context.

form makes this solution fairly cumbersome.

The third option favours cross-linguistic com-
parison, but is perhaps less intuitive for annotators.
It calls for consistent use of the categories speci-
fied in the lattice. In such a system, strong par-
tial uses of Jacaltec chubil would always be PAR-
TIAL:STRONG PARTIAL. In other words, anno-
tation is done purely on semantic grounds, disre-
garding language-specific forms. This means that
the various uses of the same (polysemous) Jacal-
tec form will receive different annotations. Even
though we believe annotators for all languages
should be able to distinguish the base level values
of the lattice based on semantic criteria, interpret-
ing such differences which lack overt expression
in a language may still be challenging.

Therefore, we believe that our fourth option
holds the most promise. This solution allows
annotators to use a value in the lattice two lev-
els higher than the markable meaning. For ex-
ample, for any use of Jacaltec chubil, annotators
would be allowed to use the label NON-NEUTRAL.
This higher-level label allows for the inference
that this particular use is either genuinely “in be-
tween” the two relevant base level categories (e.g.
overlapping the prototypes of partial support and
full support), or ambiguous between those two
categories. In this way, two levels of the lat-
tice that are problematic from a Jacaltec point of
view (FULL vs. PARTIAL on the base level and
FULL vs. STRONG PARTIAL at the lower level) are
avoided. Of course, as was the case for the treat-
ment of more coarse-grained categories, annota-
tors are still encouraged to specify lower-level val-
ues when they can be clearly judged from the con-
text. Thus, strong partial uses of Jacaltec chubil
could be labeled either NON-NEUTRAL:STRONG
PARTIAL, or simply NON-NEUTRAL.

Few cross-lingual annotation schemes have
adopted explicit guidelines for languages whose
categories cross-cut the pre-established values.
Our use of a typologically motivated lattice to or-
ganize semantic categories provides various ways
to deal with this issue, and at the same time cap-
tures insights into regularities in the division of
semantic space. We believe that the fourth ap-
proach outlined in this section has the best chances
of finding wide acceptance. It allows annotators
for specific languages to do justice to the semantic
structure of the language by recognizing the fine-
grained uses of language-specific categories. In



7

addition, the use of a secondary annotation with a
label not one, but two levels higher in the lattice
avoids the problem of which superordinate cate-
gory an in-between usage should be categorized
as, and also guarantees cross-lingual portability.

5 Cross-Lingual Annotation Pilot

In order to explore the practicality of a seman-
tic annotation scheme using a lattice structure and
the guidelines for label selection outlined above,
a small cross-lingual annotation experiment was
performed, and is discussed in this section.

5.1 Annotation Procedure and Materials

Thirty-six English sentences expressing spatial
figure-ground relations were taken from the
STREUSLE corpus (Schneider et al., 2016), and
provided thirty-six PPs as annotation targets.
These sentences came originally from travel blogs,
and were chosen to express spatial scenarios rang-
ing from surface support, to attachment, to con-
tainment (figure 3, see also Bowerman and Choi
2001). This continuum was chosen because it
is similar to the modality continuum discussed
above. While it is exceedingly rare for languages
to have one category for only support and contain-
ment, the attachment category frequently groups
with either containment or support (Bowerman
and Choi, 2001). In addition, the existence of spa-
tial situations in between these three base level cat-
egories (such as adhesion, for a band-aid on a body
part) allows us to confront difficult cross-cutting
categories with our lattice architecture.

Figure 3: Support-Attachment-Containment contin-
uum (Bowerman and Choi, 2001, p. 485)

Each sentence was translated into Dutch, Czech
and Korean by a native speaker of each language
(the first, third, and fourth authors of this paper,
respectively), and annotated by the same native
speaker. The English sentences were annotated by
the second author, also a native speaker.

The lattice in figure 4 contains the annota-
tion values, defined based on figure 3. The base
level categories are [SUPPORT, ATTACHMENT,

Location

Non-
containment

Non-support

Support

Attachment

Containment

Adhesion

”Attached
Containment”

(fig. 3e)

Prototypical
Containment

Prototypical
Attachment

Prototypical
Support

Figure 4: Annotation lattice for spatial relations

CONTAINMENT]. At the higher level, [NON-
CONTAINMENT, NON-SUPPORT] group together
[SUPPORT, ATTACHMENT] and [ATTACHMENT,
CONTAINMENT], respectively. On the lowest level
of the lattice, ADHESION cross-cuts the SUPPORT
vs. ATTACHMENT distinction, while ATTACHED
CONTAINMENT cross-cuts the ATTACHMENT vs.
CONTAINMENT distinction.

Annotators were given the following guidelines:

1. Choose a label from the base level of the lat-
tice based on the meaning of the sentence.

2. If the sentence is ambiguous between two
base level values, choose the relevant over-
arching category.

3. If the sentence expresses a category that is
in between two base level values, choose
the relevant lower-level category when con-
fident. Otherwise, choose the applicable
coarse-grained category above the base level.

4. If the sentence expresses a more fine-grained
distinction within one of the base level cate-
gories which is not given in the lattice, simply
use the applicable base level value.

5.2 Evaluation Procedure

We are aware of few previous experiments anno-
tating multilingual parallel corpora with one set of
semantic categories. Closest to our pilot study is
probably Zufferey and Degand (2017), who cal-
culate agreement between annotations of a paral-
lel corpus in English, French, German, Dutch, and
Italian. Pairwise agreement between English and
every other language is reported for each level of
the hierarchy in which their categories are struc-
tured. The agreement values are given only in raw
percentages.

We report pair-wise agreement between all pairs
of languages in our pilot. We report both the ex-



8

act correspondence of annotations between lan-
guages, and the compatibility of these annota-
tions. The first set of values is conceptualized as
a measure of the discrepancies between the se-
mantic categories of individual languages. For
example, an attachment scenario might be an-
notated as ATTACHMENT in Dutch (which has a
preposition aan specialized for attachment), but
as NON-CONTAINMENT in English, because of its
more coarse-grained semantic structure. Under
this first measure, these cases are counted as dis-
agreements.

Under the second measure, they are seen as
compatible. Since ATTACHMENT is a subcat-
egory of NON-CONTAINMENT, the Dutch an-
notation can be traced back in the lattice to
NON-CONTAINMENT, and the two languages have
equivalent annotations on this level. The differ-
ence between the exact correspondence score for
a language pair and its compatibility score mea-
sures the portability of the lattice architecture, and
its ability to abstract away from language-specific
subdivisions of semantic space.

Both the exact correspondence measure and the
compatibility measure are reported as agreement
proportions, and as Cohen’s Kappa scores (Co-
hen, 1960). We believe that, even though we
are calculating cross-lingual interannotator agree-
ment rather than monolingual agreement between
two annotators, the tasks performed by the anno-
tators are still comparable. Since we use a par-
allel corpus and the same set of annotation val-
ues, Cohen’s Kappa provides a meaningful mea-
sure of how much the proposed annotation system
improves labeling over a chance distribution.

5.3 Annotation Results

Table 1 reports cross-lingual interannotator agree-
ment for identity between the chosen labels. The
raw proportions of agreement are high, ranging
from 82% (Czech-English and Korean-English) to
93% (Czech-Dutch). The Cohen’s Kappa scores
are also acceptable (between 0.64 and 0.86).

As shown in table 2, pairwise compatibility pro-
portions are on average 7% higher than the corre-
sponding identity scores, and compatibility Kappa
scores are on average 0.15 higher than the corre-
sponding identity scores. All language pairs show
agreement greater than 90%, and all but one show
a Kappa value greater than 0.80.

The organization of annotation categories in a

Czech Dutch English
Dutch 93%

(κ = 0.86)
English 82% 86%

(κ = 0.64) (κ = 0.74)
Korean 85% 89% 85%

(κ = 0.67) (κ = 0.78) (κ = 0.66)

Table 1: Identity between cross-lingual annotations

Czech Dutch English
Dutch 96%

(κ = 0.91)
English 93% 94%

(κ = 0.86) (κ = 0.90)
Korean 90% 97% 92%

(κ = 0.79) (κ = 0.94) (κ = 0.84)

Table 2: Compatibility between cross-lingual annota-
tions

lattice paired with clear guidelines as to which lev-
els of the lattice to use in different situations there-
fore seems to be a promising way of guaranteeing
both ease of annotation and cross-linguistic com-
parability. It seems fairly successful at abstracting
away from language-specific differences in cat-
egory boundaries, as evidenced by the improve-
ment in the scores for compatibility of annotations
as compared to those for exact identity.

A reviewer points out that it is hard to as-
sess the improvement our annotation lattice of-
fers over a flat annotation scheme where anno-
tators are required to choose between [SUPPORT,
ATTACHMENT, CONTAINMENT]. We agree that a
comparison with such a control condition would
be interesting. However, re-annotating this small
corpus with such a flat annotation scheme would
lead to skewed results, because the present anno-
tators have built up familiarity with the sentences.
Since time constraints prevent us from conducting
a new annotation experiment in accordance with
this suggestion, or from finding new annotators
to provide the baseline annotation, we will simply
keep it in mind for further work.

5.4 Error Analysis
The differences between the values in table 1 and
table 2 stem from annotations which are compat-
ible, but not identical between languages. These
annotations reflect both the presence of more
coarse-grained categories and cross-cutting cate-
gories. As for the former case, examples such
as (3a) were annotated as SUPPORT in Czech and
Dutch, but as NON-CONTAINMENT in English and
(sometimes) Korean. The lattice thus allows anno-



9

tators in languages with coarse-grained categories
to suspend judgement on the base level annota-
tion categories where necessary, while maintain-
ing cross-linguistic comparability.

(3) a. ...right on the back of my car.
b. ...had nail polish on a couple of toes.

The same can largely be said for cross-cutting
categories. For the single example of surface adhe-
sion in our corpus (3b), the English and Dutch an-
notators followed guideline 3, choosing the lower-
level ADHESION category. The Czech and Korean
annotators chose ATTACHMENT and SUPPORT, re-
spectively, both of which are compatible with the
Dutch and English choices. This yields compat-
ible annotations in five of the six language pairs,
indicating that a category lattice does fairly well
in treating cross-cutting categories.

This sentence also illustrates again the problem-
atic character of continuous semantic categories
with values in between the base level annotation
categories. The ADHESION category cross-cuts
the SUPPORT vs. ATTACHMENT distinction, and
annotators for different languages (and, conceiv-
ably, within one language) will sometimes make
different judgements as to which of these two base
level categories is appropriate. Choosing a cate-
gory two levels higher in the lattice instead of just
one, as proposed in this paper, would ideally pre-
vent disagreements.

Disagreements also arose with the examples in
4, for which we offer two tentative explanations.
Examples (4a-4b), on the one hand, seem likely
to give rise to different conceptualizations on the
part of annotators. One can interpret the product
in (4a) to be strictly on top of the hair (leading to
the SUPPORT annotations in Dutch and Korean), as
clinging to every single hair (resulting in the En-
glish ATTACHMENT annotation), or as being con-
tained within the space delimited by the totality of
the hair (explaining the Czech CONTAINMENT an-
notation). Similar conceptualizations can be pro-
posed for on burger in (4b): the meat can be seen
as contained within the space delimited by the two
halves of the bun, or as supported by the bottom
half of the bun. Such alternative construals are
likely to lead to a certain proportion of disagree-
ments.

(4) a. ...put product on my hair...
b. No meat on burger...
c. ...when I am in the chair...

The disagreement in (4c) - CONTAINMENT in
English vs. SUPPORT in Czech, Dutch, and Ko-
rean - is likely to stem from different language-
specific conventionalized construals for specific
figure-ground configurations. In Dutch, for ex-
ample, the most natural translation of in the chair
would be op de stoel, using the prototypical sup-
port preposition op. Using in, the containment
preposition, is hardly possible. In other words,
the relation between a sitter and a chair is always
construed as a support relation rather than a con-
tainment relation. There does not seem to be a
straightforward solution for such cases either. It
remains to be seen, however, whether this source
of disagreements is recurrent across semantic do-
mains - it might well be more common in the do-
main of figure-ground relations than in other re-
gions of conceptual space.

6 Conclusions

This paper proposes a lattice-like architecture of
cross-lingual semantic annotation systems, with
category labels organized in different levels and
forming overlapping groupings. This allows us
to be faithful to both individual languages and
typological generalizations. An approach where
cross-cutting categories either receive a low-level,
highly specific label (when annotators are con-
fident), or a high-level and uncontroversial la-
bel, presents a middle ground between maximiz-
ing ease of annotation and maximizing typologi-
cal rigor. An exploratory cross-lingual annotation
task on a small parallel corpus in four languages
shows that such an approach has the potential to
tackle the issues discussed.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by grant
1764091 by the National Science Foundation to
the last author.

References
Omri Abend and Ari Rappoport. 2013. Universal con-

ceptual cognitive annotation (UCCA). In Proceed-
ings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 228–238, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P13-1023
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P13-1023


10

Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with
Discourse, pages 178–186, Sofia, Bulgaria. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Robert Botne. 2012. Remoteness distinctions. In
Robert I. Binnick, editor, The Oxford handbook of
tense and aspect, pages 536–562. Oxford University
Press.

Melissa Bowerman and Soonja Choi. 2001. Shap-
ing meanings for language: universal and language-
specific in the acquisition of semantic categories. In
Language acquisition and conceptual development,
pages 475–511. Cambridge University Press.

Kasper Boye. 2012. Epistemic meaning: A crosslin-
guistic and functional-cognitive study, volume 43 of
Empirical Approaches to Language Typology. De
Gruyter Mouton, Berlin.

Joan L. Bybee, Revere Dale Perkins, and William
Pagliuca. 1994. The Evolution of Grammar: Tense,
Aspect, and Modality in the Languages of the World.
University of Chicago Press Chicago.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and psychological
measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Bernard Comrie. 1989. Language universals and lin-
guistic typology: Syntax and morphology. Univer-
sity of Chicago press.

Greville G. Corbett. 2000. Number. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Colette Grinevald Craig. 1977. The structure of Jacal-
tec. University of Texas Press.

William Croft. 2002. Typology and universals. Cam-
bridge University Press.

William Croft. 2012. Verbs: Aspect and Causal Struc-
ture. Oxford University Press.

William Croft, Pavlı́na Pešková, and Michael Regan.
2017. Integrating decompositional event structures
into storylines. In Proceedings of the Events and
Stories in the News Workshop, pages 98–109, Van-
couver, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Östen Dahl. 1981. On the definition of the telic-atelic
(bounded–nonbounded) distinction in tense and as-
pect. Syntax and Semantics, 14:79–90.

Östen Dahl. 1983. Temporal distance: Remoteness
distinctions in tense-aspect systems. Linguistics,
21(1):105–122.

Georg van Driem. 1987. A Grammar of Limbu. Mou-
ton de Gruyter.

William A Foley. 1991. The Yimas language of New
Guinea. Stanford University Press.

Kira Griffitt, Jennifer Tracey, Ann Bies, and Stephanie
Strassel. 2018. Simple semantic annotation and sit-
uation frames: Two approaches to basic text un-
derstanding in LORELEI. In Proceedings of the
11th Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence, pages 1672–1676, Miyazaki, Japan. European
Language Resource Association.

John Haiman. 1980. Hua, a Papuan language of the
Eastern highlands of New Guinea. John Benjamins
Publishing.

Martin Haspelmath. 2003. The geometry of grammat-
ical meaning: Semantic maps and cross-linguistic
comparison. In The new psychology of language,
pages 217–248. Psychology Press.

Graham Katz and Fabrizio Arosio. 2001. The anno-
tation of temporal information in natural language
sentences. In Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Work-
shop on Temporal and Spatial Information Process-
ing. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Julia Lavid, Marta Carretero, and Juan Rafael
Zamorano-Mansilla. 2016. Contrastive annotation
of epistemicity in the multinot project: preliminary
steps. In Proceedings of the ISA-12, Twelfth Joint
ACL-ISO Workshop on Interoperable Semantic An-
notation, held in conjunction with Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference, pages 81–88.

Malvina Nissim, Paola Pietrandrea, Andrea Sanso, and
Caterina Mauri. 2013. Cross-linguistic annotation
of modality: a data-driven hierarchical model. In
Proceedings of the 9th Joint ISO - ACL SIGSEM
Workshop on Interoperable Semantic Annotation,
pages 7–14, Potsdam, Germany. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 1659–1666, Por-
torož, Slovenia. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

Frank Robert Palmer. 2001. Mood and modality. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Edoardo Maria Ponti, Helen O’Horan, Yevgeni Berzak,
Ivan Vulic, Roi Reichart, Thierry Poibeau, Ekaterina
Shutova, and Anna Korhonen. 2018. Modeling lan-
guage variation and universals: A survey on typo-
logical linguistics for natural language processing.
CoRR, abs/1807.00914.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The penn discourse treebank 2.0. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08),

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-2322
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-2322
https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_194879/component/file_532258/content
https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_194879/component/file_532258/content
https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_194879/component/file_532258/content
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.1024.9753&rep=rep1&type=pdf
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.1024.9753&rep=rep1&type=pdf
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-2713
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-2713
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1265
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1265
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1265
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.465.7465&rep=rep1&type=pdf
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.465.7465&rep=rep1&type=pdf
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.465.7465&rep=rep1&type=pdf
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W01-1315
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W01-1315
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W01-1315
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Julia_Lavid/publication/303939087_Contrastive_Annotation_of_Epistemicity_in_the_MULTINOT_Project_Preliminary_Steps/links/575f30b908aec91374b439b7/Contrastive-Annotation-of-Epistemicity-in-the-MULTINOT-Project-Preliminary-Steps.pdf
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Julia_Lavid/publication/303939087_Contrastive_Annotation_of_Epistemicity_in_the_MULTINOT_Project_Preliminary_Steps/links/575f30b908aec91374b439b7/Contrastive-Annotation-of-Epistemicity-in-the-MULTINOT-Project-Preliminary-Steps.pdf
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Julia_Lavid/publication/303939087_Contrastive_Annotation_of_Epistemicity_in_the_MULTINOT_Project_Preliminary_Steps/links/575f30b908aec91374b439b7/Contrastive-Annotation-of-Epistemicity-in-the-MULTINOT-Project-Preliminary-Steps.pdf
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-0501
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-0501
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L16-1262
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L16-1262
http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00914
http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00914
http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00914
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/pdf/754_paper.pdf


11

pages 2961–2968, Marrakech, Morocco. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

James Pustejovsky, José M Castano, Robert Ingria,
Roser Sauri, Robert J Gaizauskas, Andrea Set-
zer, Graham Katz, and Dragomir R Radev. 2003.
Timeml: Robust specification of event and tempo-
ral expressions in text. New directions in question
answering, 3:28–34.

Sampo Pyysalo, Jenna Kanerva, Anna Missilä,
Veronika Laippala, and Filip Ginter. 2015. Univer-
sal dependencies for Finnish. In Proceedings of the
20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics (NODALIDA 2015), pages 163–172, Vilnius,
Lithuania. Linköping University Electronic Press,
Sweden.

Patrick Saint-Dizier. 2006. PrepNet: a multilingual
lexical description of prepositions. In Proceedings
of the Fifth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06), pages 1021–
1026, Genoa, Italy. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Nathan Schneider, Jena D. Hwang, Vivek Srikumar,
Meredith Green, Abhijit Suresh, Kathryn Conger,
Tim O’Gorman, and Martha Palmer. 2016. A cor-
pus of preposition supersenses. In Proceedings of
the 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop held in
conjunction with ACL 2016 (LAW-X 2016), pages
99–109, Berlin, Germany. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Suzuko Tamura. 1988. The Ainu Language. Sanseido,
Tokyo. Reprinted in 2000, translated from Japanese
into English by Sanseido Co. Ltd.

Ljuba N. Veselinova. 2013. Verbal number and supple-
tion. In Matthew S. Dryer and Martin Haspelmath,
editors, The World Atlas of Language Structures On-
line. Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthro-
pology, Leipzig.

Nianwen Xue, Ondrej Bojar, Jan Hajic, Martha Palmer,
Zdenka Uresova, and Xiuhong Zhang. 2014. Not
an interlingua, but close: Comparison of English
AMRs to Chinese and Czech. In Proceedings of
the Ninth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’14), pages 1765–
1772, Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Sandrine Zufferey and Liesbeth Degand. 2017. Anno-
tating the meaning of discourse connectives in mul-
tilingual corpora. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic
Theory, 13(2):399–422.

Sandrine Zufferey, Liesbeth Degand, Andrei Popescu-
Bellis, and Ted Sanders. 2012. Empirical valida-
tions of multilingual annotation schemes for dis-
course relations. In Eighth Joint ISO-ACL/SIGSEM
Workshop on Interoperable Semantic Annotation,
pages 77–84, Pisa, Italy. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

https://www.aaai.org/Papers/Symposia/Spring/2003/SS-03-07/SS03-07-005.pdf
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/Symposia/Spring/2003/SS-03-07/SS03-07-005.pdf
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1821
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1821
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2006/pdf/45_pdf.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2006/pdf/45_pdf.pdf
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W16-1712
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W16-1712
https://wals.info/chapter/80
https://wals.info/chapter/80
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/384_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/384_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/384_Paper.pdf
https://sigsem.uvt.nl/isa8/isa8_submission_4-2.pdf
https://sigsem.uvt.nl/isa8/isa8_submission_4-2.pdf
https://sigsem.uvt.nl/isa8/isa8_submission_4-2.pdf


12

Supplementary Materials

Proposed annotation lattice for epistemic strength

Epistemic

Strength

Non-neutral

Non-full

Partial

Full

Neutral

Strong partial

Weak partial

Strong neutral

Weak neutral

Proposed annotation lattice for number

Number

Singular

Non-singular
Paucal

Plural

Non-dual
Paucal

Dual

Greater
Plural

Trial

Non-trial
Paucal

Proposed annotation lattice for spatial relations

Location

Non-
containment

Non-support

Support

Attachment

Containment

Adhesion

”Attached
Containment”

(fig. 3e)
Prototypical
Containment

Prototypical
Attachment

Prototypical
Support



13

Proposed annotation lattice for aspect

Aspect

Imperfective

Progressive

State

Atelic
Process

Perfective

Activity

Endeavor

Telic
Process

Transitory State

Inherent State

Point State

Undirected Activity

Directed Activity

Semelfactive

Undirected Endeavor

Directed Endeavor

Incremental Accomplishment

Nonincremental Accomplishment

Directed Achievement Reversible Directed Achievement

Ireversible Directed Achievement

Proposed annotation lattice for time reference

Time
Reference

Non-future

Non-past

Past

Present

Future

Remote
Past

Near Past

Near
Future

Remote
Future

Far Past

Near Pre-
Hodiernal

Hodiernal
Past

Hodiernal
Future

Near Post-
Hodiernal

Far
Future

Far Past

Near Pre-
Hesternal

Hesternal

Crasternal

Post-
Crasternal

Far Future

Mythological
Past

Historical
Far Past

These lattices are based on Dahl (1983), Bybee et al. (1994) and Botne (2012) for time reference, Boye (2012) for epistemic
strength, Corbett (2000) for number, and Bowerman and Choi (2001) for spatial relations. The aspect lattice is based on the fine-
grained aspectual types defined in Croft (2012), with the addition of the category of endeavors (processes that terminate without
reaching a natural endpoint or telos), described in Croft et al. (2017). Endeavors are sometimes grouped with telic processes,
sometimes not (Dahl, 1981). Imperfectives group together unbounded processes and states, while progressives group together
processes, unbounded or bounded (although they describe the state of being in the middle of the process).



14

References
Robert Botne. 2012. Remoteness distinctions. In

Robert I. Binnick, editor, The Oxford handbook of
tense and aspect, pages 536–562. Oxford University
Press.

Melissa Bowerman and Soonja Choi. 2001. Shap-
ing meanings for language: universal and language-
specific in the acquisition of semantic categories. In
Language acquisition and conceptual development,
pages 475–511. Cambridge University Press.

Kasper Boye. 2012. Epistemic meaning: A crosslin-
guistic and functional-cognitive study, volume 43 of
Empirical Approaches to Language Typology. De
Gruyter Mouton, Berlin.

Joan L. Bybee, Revere Dale Perkins, and William
Pagliuca. 1994. The Evolution of Grammar: Tense,
Aspect, and Modality in the Languages of the World.
University of Chicago Press Chicago.

Greville G. Corbett. 2000. Number. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

William Croft. 2012. Verbs: Aspect and Causal Struc-
ture. Oxford University Press.

William Croft, Pavlı́na Pešková, and Michael Regan.
2017. Integrating decompositional event structures
into storylines. In Proceedings of the Events and
Stories in the News Workshop, pages 98–109, Van-
couver, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Östen Dahl. 1981. On the definition of the telic-atelic
(bounded–nonbounded) distinction in tense and as-
pect. Syntax and Semantics, 14:79–90.

Östen Dahl. 1983. Temporal distance: Remoteness
distinctions in tense-aspect systems. Linguistics,
21(1):105–122.

https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_194879/component/file_532258/content
https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_194879/component/file_532258/content
https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_194879/component/file_532258/content
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-2713
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-2713

