



















































Simulating Spanish-English Code-Switching: El Modelo Está Generating Code-Switches


Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 20–29
Minneapolis, USA, June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

20

Simulating Spanish-English Code-Switching: El Modelo Está
Generating Code-Switches

Chara Tsoukala
Centre for Language Studies,

Radboud University
c.tsoukala@let.ru.nl

Stefan L. Frank
Centre for Language Studies,

Radboud University
s.frank@let.ru.nl

Antal van den Bosch
KNAW Meertens Institute;

Centre for Language Studies,
Radboud University

a.vandenbosch@let.ru.nl

Jorge Valdés Kroff
Department of Spanish and Portuguese Studies,

University of Florida
jvaldeskroff@ufl.edu

Mirjam Broersma
Centre for Language Studies,

Radboud University
m.broersma@let.ru.nl

Abstract

Multilingual speakers are able to switch from
one language to the other (“code-switch”) be-
tween or within sentences. Because the under-
lying cognitive mechanisms are not well un-
derstood, in this study we use computational
cognitive modeling to shed light on the pro-
cess of code-switching. We employed the
Bilingual Dual-path model, a Recurrent Neu-
ral Network of bilingual sentence production
(Tsoukala et al., 2017) and simulated sentence
production in simultaneous Spanish-English
bilinguals. Our first goal was to investigate
whether the model would code-switch with-
out being exposed to code-switched training
input. The model indeed produced code-
switches even without any exposure to such
input and the patterns of code-switches are
in line with earlier linguistic work (Poplack,
1980). The second goal of this study was to
investigate an auxiliary phrase asymmetry that
exists in Spanish-English code-switched pro-
duction. Using this cognitive model, we ex-
amined a possible cause for this asymmetry.
To our knowledge, this is the first computa-
tional cognitive model that aims to simulate
code-switched sentence production.

1 Introduction

People who speak several languages are able
to switch from one language to the other, be-
tween or within sentences, a process called code-
switching. Code-switching has been studied for
decades by theoretical linguists and sociolinguists
(e.g., Poplack 1980; Muysken 2000) and more
recently by psycholinguists (e.g., Bullock and
Toribio 2009). In the past few years it has started
being studied with a computational methodology,
and it has garnered attention among the natu-

ral language processing (NLP) research commu-
nity. Several NLP applications have emerged, e.g.,
to detect code-switches (Solorio and Liu, 2008;
Guzmán et al., 2017), or to automatically recog-
nize code-switched speech (Yılmaz et al., 2016;
Gonen and Goldberg, 2018). Moreover, there are
a small number of cognitive computational mod-
els relevant to code-switching: Filippi et al. (2014)
developed a model of code-switched word pro-
duction and Janciauskas and Chang (2018), while
simulating age of acquisition effects on native Ko-
rean speakers of English, reported that the mod-
els that had been exposed to English later pro-
duced code-switches, i.e., occasionally used Ko-
rean words in their predominantly English produc-
tion.

The underlying mechanisms of code-switching,
however, are still not well understood. Therefore,
we suggest using computational cognitive model-
ing to simulate code-switching behavior in multi-
linguals with the goal of gaining more insight into
the process of code-switching. In this work, we
have employed a model of bilingual sentence pro-
duction (Tsoukala et al., 2017) and tested whether
it can produce spontaneous code-switches without
being trained on code-switched sentences (Exper-
iment 1, Section 3). We wanted to test whether
code-switching can be (partially) attributed to in-
ternal factors and explained by the distributions
of the two languages involved, or whether it is
strictly a community-based practice that can only
be explained by exposure to code-switches. To
test the former, we hypothesized that a model that
receives training input in two languages but no
code-switched sentences, will nevertheless be able
to produce code-switched sentences by combin-
ing patterns from the two languages it has been



21

trained on. We then employed this model to in-
vestigate a specific production phenomenon that
occurs in Spanish-English code-switching (Exper-
iment 2). As explained in Section 4, we wanted to
test whether the phenomenon of interest is caused
by the distributional properties of the two lan-
guages. This is something that can be explicitly
tested with this model because it is not trained on
code-switched input.

To our knowledge, this is the first computa-
tional cognitive model that aims to simulate code-
switched sentence production.

2 Model

To simulate code-switched sentence production,
we first needed to simulate bilingual production.
For that purpose, we employed the Bilingual Dual-
path model (Tsoukala et al., 2017) and trained it to
simulate simultaneous Spanish-English bilinguals,
i.e., speakers who acquired both Spanish and En-
glish from infancy.

The Bilingual Dual-path model is a modified
version of Dual-path (Chang, 2002). We chose
to work with, and extend, the Dual-path model
because it is one of the most successful and em-
pirically validated cognitive models of sentence
production. It has been used to explain a wide
range of phenomena in various languages; for an
overview see Frank et al. (in press).

2.1 Bilingual Dual-path Model

The Bilingual Dual-path model (Figure 1) is a Re-
current Neural Network (RNN) based on the Sim-
ple Recurrent Network (SRN; Elman 1990) archi-
tecture. It learns to convert a message into a sen-
tence by predicting the sentence word by word.
Dual-path got its name because of its two path-
ways that influence the production of each word:
i) the meaning, or semantic, system that learns to
map words onto concepts (and their realization,
see below and Section 2.2.1), thematic roles, event
semantics and the intended language (“target lan-
guage”), and ii) the sequencing, or syntactic, sys-
tem that is an SRN that learns to abstract syntactic
patterns. Both paths influence the next word pre-
diction (the “output” layer).

To express a new message (see Section 2.2.4
for examples of messages), the following items
are fixed and influence the production of the first
word: the to-be-expressed semantic roles have
fixed connections with their concepts and realiza-

tions, and the relevant “event semantics” and “tar-
get language” units are activated. Additionally, the
hidden layer’s context units are reset to a default
value (0.5 in our simulations).

The output word is determined as the word with
the highest activation in the output layer. Once an
output word has been produced, it is fed back as
input (to the “input” layer). During the training
phase, the target word is given as input instead of
the (potentially different) output word.

The sequencing system is a regular SRN that
has one recurrent hidden layer (of 110 units in
our simulations) and two 70-unit “compress” lay-
ers that are placed between the input word and the
hidden layer, and between the hidden layer and the
output word.

The meaning system learns to map the input
word onto a concept and, whenever relevant, the
realization of that concept (PRON for pronoun,
INDEF for an indefinite article and DEF for def-
inite articles; see Section 2.2.1 (“Message”) for
concrete examples).

A difference between this architecture and other
RNNs is that whenever a new message needs to
be expressed, the network receives fixed connec-
tions between concepts and roles; this allows their
separation (instead of having a single unit for,
e.g., ‘AGENT-WOMAN’) and, in turn, enables the
model to generalize and to produce words in novel
roles. For instance, if the concept ‘WOMAN’ has
only been seen as an AGENT in the training set,
it can still be correctly expressed in novel roles
(PATIENT, RECIPIENT) during the test phase
(Chang, 2002).

All layers use the tanh activation function, ex-
cept the output and predicted role layers that
use softmax. The model is built in Python
and can be found at https://github.com/
xtsoukala/CMCL19.

2.2 Input Languages

In order to simulate Spanish-English bilingual
sentence production, we generated input with rel-
evant properties of the two languages. The sen-
tences (and their messages, see Section 2.2.1) are
generated before the training starts, and they are
based on the allowed structures (Section 2.2.2).
For each part of speech (POS) a randomly selected
lexical item (from that POS and target language) is
sampled from the lexicon (Section 2.2.3). The ad-
vantage of using artificial (miniature) languages is

https://github.com/xtsoukala/CMCL19
https://github.com/xtsoukala/CMCL19


22

input (194)
book
the
he
she
ella
libro

mujer
woman

compress (70)

hidden (110)

role (6)
AGENT

PATIENT

event sem (11)
PRESENT
SIMPLE

role (6)
AGENT

PATIENT

target lang (2)
ENGLISH
SPANISH

output (194)
book
the
he
she
ella
libro

mujer
woman

concept (45)
WOMAN

BOOK

compress (70)

realization(3)
(IN)DEF, PRON

concept (45)
WOMAN

BOOK

realization(3)
(IN)DEF, PRON

Figure 1: Bilingual Dual-path, the model used in these simulations, is a next-word prediction model that converts
messages into sentences. It is based on an SRN (the lower path, via the ‘compress’ layers) that is augmented with
a semantic stream (upper path) that contains information about concepts, thematic roles, event semantics, and the
target language.

that we can manipulate the frequency and gram-
mar of the input and isolate (and thereby study)
the phenomenon of interest.

2.2.1 Message
The model is trained using generated sentences (as
described above) paired with their message that
consists of semantics and their realization, event-
semantics, and target language, which will be ex-
plained in turn below.

In these simulations, the semantics contains in-
formation regarding 45 unique concepts and 6 the-
matic roles: AGENT, AGENT-MODIFIER, PA-
TIENT, ACTION-LINKING, RECIPIENT, and
ATTRIBUTE.

ACTION-LINKING is a combined thematic
role that can be used for all verb types: action (e.g.,
‘throws’), linking (‘is’) and possession (‘has’).
ATTRIBUTE is an attribute expressed with a link-
ing verb concept (‘BE’). AGENT and RECIPI-
ENT can be expressed only with animate nouns.

A concept (e.g., WOMAN for the English
word ‘woman’ or Spanish word ‘mujer’) is as-
signed to each thematic role (during the sentence
generation process) along with a realization at-
tribute (PRON for pronoun, DEF for definite ar-
ticle, and INDEF for indefinite article) accord-
ing to the meaning that needs to be expressed.
For instance, in the sentence “the woman runs”
the message would include “AGENT=WOMAN,
DEF”, whereas “a woman” would be encoded
as “AGENT=WOMAN, INDEF”, and “she” as
“AGENT=WOMAN, PRON”.

Furthermore, the message contains event se-
mantic information (denoted as EVENT-SEM),
which gives information regarding the tense
(PRESENT, PAST) and aspect (SIMPLE, PER-
FECT or PROGRESSIVE). The EVENT-SEM
layer also contains information regarding the roles
needed for that particular message; the model
needs to keep track of the roles expressed and
make sure that if, e.g., the role of RECIPIENT
is activated then the recipient has also been ex-
pressed.

Additionally, the message contains information
about the target language so that the model knows
whether it is learning to produce an English or
Spanish sentence.

2.2.2 Structures
The allowed structures for both languages are the
following in our simulations:

• SV: Subject - Verb, e.g., “a happy dog runs”;
“un perro feliz corre”

• SVO: Subject - Verb - Object, e.g., “the boy
is carrying a book”; “el niño está llevando un
libro”

• SVDOPP: Subject - Verb - Direct Object -
Prepositional Phrase, e.g., “she shows a book
to the girl”; “ella muestra un libro a la niña”

• SVIODO: Subject - Verb - Indirect Object
- Direct Object: e.g., “she shows the girl a
book” (Structure occurs only in English)



23

• SVPPDO: Subject - Verb - Prepositional
Phrase - Direct Object: e.g., “ella muestra a la
niña un libro” (“she shows to a girl a book”).
Structure only used in Spanish.

The roles can be expressed using either a Noun
Phrase (NP) with definite (DEF) or indefinite (IN-
DEF) article (e.g., ‘the woman’, ‘a woman’). Ad-
ditionally, AGENT can be expressed with a pro-
noun (PRON, e.g. ‘she’). NPs optionally contain
a modifier (an adjective, e.g., ‘a tall woman’).

The verbs are either intransitive (e.g., ‘sleep’),
transitive (‘carry’), double transitive (‘show’),
linking (‘is’) or possession verb (‘has’). The tense
is present or past and the aspect is simple, progres-
sive, or perfect. Only the simple past was used
whereas the present tense is used with all three as-
pects:

• simple present: “the man cooks”; “el hombre
cocina”

• present progressive: “the man is cooking”;
“el hombre está cocinando”

• present perfect: “the man has cooked”; “el
hombre ha cocinado”

2.2.3 Bilingual Lexicon
The lexicon consists of 194 words (Table 1): 88
English words, 105 Spanish words, and the shared
period (‘.’) that marks the end of the sentence. The
Spanish lexicon is bigger because this language is
gendered: for instance, ‘tired’ is either ‘cansado’,
if it modifies a masculine noun, or ‘cansada’ for
a feminine noun. Syntactic category information
(such as ‘adjective’, ‘participle’) is not given ex-
plicitly; the model learns it through the syntactic
path during training.

2.2.4 Input Examples
To illustrate the input, here is an example of the
message (excluding the target language):

AGENT=WOMAN, INDEF

AGENT-MOD=TALL

ACTION-LINKING=GIVE

PATIENT=BOOK, DEF

RECIPIENT=GIRL, DEF

EVENT-SEM=SIMPLE,PRESENT,AGENT,
AGENT-MOD, PATIENT, RECIPIENT

POS n Examples
Verbs 64

auxiliary 4 is, has, está, ha
intransitive 32 walked, swims, nada
transitive 12 carries, push, lleva
double transitive 12 gives, throws, da
possession 4 has, had, tiene, tenı́a
linking 1 4 is, was, está, estaba

Participles 2 57 eating, eaten, comido
Nouns 46

animate 10 uncle, aunt, tı́o, tı́a
inanimate 36 pen, book, libro

Adjectives 22 busy, ocupado
Determiners 6 a, the, un, una, el, la
Prepositions 2 to, a
Pronouns 4 he, she, él, ella
1 Three of these overlap with the auxiliary verbs.
2 Nine of these have the same form as a verb; e.g.,

‘walked’ is either a perfect participle or a verb.

Table 1: POS in bilingual lexicon (Spanish in italics)

This message would be expressed linguistically
in the following manner in English and Spanish:

• a tall woman gives the girl a book .

• una mujer alta da a la niña un libro . (word-
by-word translation: “a woman tall gives to
the girl a book”)

If the aspect was PROGRESSIVE instead of
SIMPLE, on the other hand, the corresponding
sentences would be “a tall woman is giving the girl
a book”; “una mujer alta está dando a la niña un
libro”.

The linking verb messages were encoded in the
following manner:

AGENT=WOMAN, DEF

ACTION-LINKING=BE

ATTRIBUTE=TIRED

EVENT-SEM=SIMPLE,PRESENT,
AGENT, ATTRIBUTE

and expressed as “the woman is tired”; “la mu-
jer está cansada”.

2.3 Training

The model was trained on a total of 3040 randomly
generated sentence-message pairs in English and



24

Spanish (training set; 50% [1520 pairs] per lan-
guage). Recall that no code-switched sentences
were given as input.

We ran 60 simulations using different input and
different random initial weights per simulation,
as the input and the weights are the only non-
deterministic parts of the model. The models were
trained for 30 epochs, where 1 epoch corresponds
to a full iteration of the training set (3040 sen-
tences). At the beginning of each epoch, the train-
ing set was shuffled.

The “realization–role” and “role–realization”
connection weights were set to 10, and the
“concept–role” and “role–concept” to 30. The ini-
tial learning rate was 0.10 and linearly decreased
over 10 epochs until it reached 0.02; the momen-
tum was set to 0.9. None of the hyper-parameters
was optimized for the task, and they do not play
a crucial role in the results. We selected the val-
ues from Tsoukala et al. (2017) and increased the
“concept–role” connections because this resulted
in slightly better performance (the current experi-
ments use more concepts).

2.4 Evaluation and Performance Threshold

The correctness of a sentence is determined
by whether the correct (and complete) semantic
meaning has been expressed in a grammatical sen-
tence but not necessarily in the target syntactic
structure. For instance, if the target sentence is
“a sad grandfather is showing the book to a girl”
and the produced sentence is “a sad grandfather
is showing the pen to a girl” it is counted as in-
correct, whereas if the produced sentence is “a
sad grandfather is showing the girl the book” it
is counted as correct even though it was expressed
with a different syntactic structure than the target
one. If it is expressed with a different aspect (e.g.,
perfect instead of progressive) or realization (e.g.,
pronoun instead of an NP with an indefinite ar-
ticle) it is also marked as incorrect. If the sen-
tence contains code-switches it is marked as cor-
rect as long as it expresses the correct meaning,
is expressed in one of the allowed structures (Sec-
tion 2.2.2) and the POS sequence of each phrase
(NP, Verb Phase [VP], Prepositional Phrase [PP])
is valid in either language.

For all the experiments, we excluded from the
analysis simulations that did not learn to produce
at least 75% of the messages correctly according
to the criteria above.

3 Experiment 1: Code-Switching

In this study, we investigate whether the Bilin-
gual Dual-path would produce code-switched sen-
tences if trained on Spanish and English (but not
code-switched) sentences. We investigate the oc-
currence of different patterns of code-switching
that have been observed in the language use of hu-
man bilingual speakers.

3.1 Background
Muysken (2000) proposed the following typology
of code-switching:

1. Insertional switching
Insertions of single words/fixed expressions:

• lexical (e.g., noun): “I read a libro” (I
read a book)

• fixed expressions/ interjections/ id-
iomatic expressions: “Oh my god,
estamos sin palabras” (we are speech-
less)

2. Alternational switching
Alternation between the two languages, in-
volving multi-word sequences, either be-
tween or within sentences:

• Inter-sentential switching: “I heard you
had an accident. ¿Qué pasó?” (What
happened?)

• Intra-sentential switching: “I had a
hard time finding tu casa esta mañana.”
(your house this morning)

3. Congruent lexicalization
In cases where the languages share syntactic
structures and are highly cognate, it is pos-
sible to use the shared syntax and insert lex-
ical items from either language, thus seem-
ingly switching back and forth: e.g., “Bueno,
in other words, el flight que sale de Chicago
around three o’clock” (‘Fine, ... the flight
which leaves from ...’) (Pfaff, 1979)

3.1.1 Code-Switching by Syntactic Category
In a seminal study, Poplack (1980) observed the
Puerto-Rican community in the US. She found
that balanced bilinguals produced mostly complex
code-switches, such as intra-sentential ones, and
few insertions. Switches at the NP were more fre-
quent than switches at the VP and PP, and noun
insertions were the most frequent lexical insertion
whereas determiner insertions occurred rarely.



25

Figure 2: Percentage of correctly produced sentences
and of code-switches among those sentences. The
shaded area shows the Standard Error of the Mean
(SEM) computed over 56 simulations

3.2 Method

To simulate code-switching, we trained the model
as described in Section 2.3 and tested it on 760 un-
seen sentences (test set) that were randomly gen-
erated in the same manner as the training set.

During the test (“production”) phase we manip-
ulated the model’s language control by activating
a target language only at the beginning, before the
production of the first word, so as to indicate the
conversational setting (intended language). Af-
ter the first word had been produced, we acti-
vated both target language nodes, thus allowing
the model to produce the sentence in either lan-
guage or to code-switch.

We excluded from the analysis four models that
did not pass the 75% performance threshold (as
explained in Section 2.4). The reported results are
from the remaining 56 simulations.

3.3 Results

As hypothesized, the model produced code-
switches even though it had not been exposed to
code-switched input. The model code-switched in
18.09% of the correctly produced sentences (at the
last epoch, see Figure 2).

3.3.1 Typology of Code-Switching in the
Model’s Output

Figure 3 shows the insertions per POS and the al-
ternational code-switched types (per POS at which
the first language switch occurred) that were pro-
duced by the model at the end of the training
(30th epoch). The model produced alternational

switches more frequently than insertional switches
(13.57% vs 4.52%).

3.3.2 Examples of Code-Switched Sentences
Insertional code-switches of different syntactic
categories are illustrated below:

• Noun insertion:
Target: un anfitrión feliz ha pateado un
bolı́grafo . (English: a happy host has kicked
a pen)
Output: un anfitrión feliz ha pateado un pen .

• Verb insertion:
Target: un camarero llevó la llave . (English:
a waiter carried the key)
Output: un camarero carried la llave .

• Determiner insertion:
Target: he is showing the book to the father .
Output: he is showing el book to the father .

• Adjective insertion:
Target: a man is sad . Output: a man is triste .

Examples of alternational switches are provided
below:

• Alternation at the determiner (Noun Phrase):
Target: the uncle has shown a father the toy .
Output: the uncle has shown un padre the
toy .

• Alternation at the noun:
Target: the short boy shows a brother a book .
Output: the short boy shows a libro a un her-
mano .

• Alternation at the preposition (Prepositional
Phrase):
Target: the tall waiter has given a brother a
book .
Output: the tall waiter has given a un her-
mano un libro .

• Alternation at the auxiliary verb (Auxiliary
Phrase):
Target: the short waiter is showing a dog a
toy .
Output: the short waiter está mostrando a un
perro un juguete .

Note that in the third example (Prepositional
Phrase) the model inserted a preposition when
switching, thus adhering to Spanish grammar: The



26

ad
jec

tiv
e

au
xil

iar
y

de
te

rm
ine

r

no
un

pa
rti

cip
le

pr
ep

os
itio

n

ve
rb

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
%

 o
f c

or
re

ct
 s

en
te

nc
es

insertional
target lang: Spanish
target lang: English

ad
jec

tiv
e

au
xil

iar
y

de
te

rm
ine

r

no
un

pa
rti

cip
le

pr
ep

os
itio

n

ve
rb

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

%
 o

f c
or

re
ct

 s
en

te
nc

es

alternational
target lang: Spanish
target lang: English

Figure 3: Types of insertional switching (left) and alternational switching (right). For alternational switches, the
POS indicates the first point of switch. All values designate the percentage of correctly produced sentences. The
error bars show the SEM computed over 56 simulations.

double dative does not exist with the double noun
phrase form in Spanish. This cross-linguistic dif-
ference is even more relevant in the fourth exam-
ple (Auxiliary Phrase switch) because the verb is
in Spanish and the sentence would have been en-
tirely ungrammatical if the model had not inserted
a preposition (“a un perro”).

3.4 Discussion
The model produced spontaneous code-switches
through the manipulation of the target language,
without being exposed to code-switched input.
This supports the hypothesis that code-switches
can occur due to internal and distributional fac-
tors, and not only because of exposure to code-
switching.

Simulating a balanced bilingual speaker, the
model produced mostly alternational switches as
opposed to insertional ones. This is in line with
Poplack’s (1980) observation. Furthermore, al-
ternations at the NP (alternational switch at the
determiner) were more likely than alternations at
the VP (alternational switch at the verb) or PP
(alternational switch at the preposition), which is
also in line with the patterns observed by Poplack.
However, the model also produced code-switching
patterns that are not attested in humans. For in-
stance, the model inserted determiners (1.11% of
the correctly produced sentences), especially En-
glish determiners in an otherwise Spanish sen-
tence (0.68% of correctly produced sentences).
We hypothesize that the model has this preference
because determiners in English are not gendered.
This means both that the model does not need to
select a gendered article and that it prefers to use

the English determiner which has twice the fre-
quency of the Spanish ones (as, e.g., ‘the’ is the
translation of both ‘el’ and ‘la’ that are the Span-
ish definite determiners for masculine and femi-
nine nouns respectively).

In bilingual environments where both languages
are used, bilingual speakers start with an intended
language that is defined by the conversational en-
vironment, but they are capable of communicat-
ing using either of their languages, or by code-
switching (Grosjean, 2001). The top-down lan-
guage control manipulation in the model (i.e., ac-
tivating both target languages) is analogous to ma-
nipulating the conversational setting in which a
speaker is interacting. Spontaneous code-switches
occur when there is no target language preference.
We only activate a target language right before the
production of the first word so as to set the conver-
sational environment.

4 Experiment 2: Auxiliary Phrase
Asymmetry

Our second experiment applies the model to a
specific code-switching phenomenon: a produc-
tion asymmetry that has been observed among
Spanish-English communities in the US.

4.1 Background
Spanish-English bilinguals are moderately likely
to code-switch in the progressive structure be-
tween the Spanish auxiliary “estar” (“to be” ) and
the participle. For instance:

1. Las personas están protesting (The people
are protesting)



27

5 10 15 20 25
epochs

0

1

2

3

4

5

progressive perfect

5 10 15 20 25
epochs

0

1

2

3

4

5

progressive perfect

Figure 4: Percentage of Spanish-to-English participle switches for the correctly produced sentences per aspect in
the “haber-model” (left) and the “tener-model” (right). Shaded areas show the SEM computed over 47 simulations.

is valid, whereas a switch at the perfect structure
is rarely produced between the Spanish auxiliary
“haber” (“to have”) and the participle:

2. * Las personas han protested (The people
have protested)

Furthermore, a switch at the auxiliary is likely
for both structures: “Las personas are protesting”,
“Las personas have protested”.

This phenomenon is known as the “auxiliary
phrase asymmetry” (Guzzardo Tamargo et al.,
2016; Poplack, 1980; Pfaff, 1979), and it has
been confirmed both in production through corpus
analysis and in comprehension through an eye-
tracking-while-reading study (Guzzardo Tamargo
et al.).

According to the “grammaticalization account”,
the source of this asymmetry is that “estar” has
more semantic weight and is syntactically more
independent as it also functions as a linking verb
(e.g., “el enfermero está cansado”; “the nurse is
tired”), whereas “haber” is highly grammatical-
ized as it is almost exclusively used as an auxiliary.
The verb of possession in Spanish is “tener” (“el
enfermero tiene un libro”; “the nurse has a book”),
and “haber” is only used as an auxiliary verb or
in archaic formulations (Guzzardo Tamargo et al.,
2016). An alternative hypothesis suggested, but
not attested, by Guzzardo Tamargo et al. is that the
asymmetry emerges from community-supported
practice (“exposure-based account”), i.e., speakers
must be exposed to the production asymmetry.

4.2 Method
To investigate if the model provides support for
the grammaticalization account, we first tested

whether the asymmetry would emerge in the
model described in Section 2.3; this would imply
that the asymmetry can emerge even only from the
distributional patterns of the two languages and
that the exposure-based account is not necessary to
explain the phenomenon, as the asymmetry is not
present in the input. Second, we took advantage
of the fact that the model input is generated and
can therefore be manipulated, and we tested ex-
plicitly the grammaticalization hypothesis by re-
placing all instances of “haber” with “tener”, the
Spanish main verb “to have”, thereby adding se-
mantic weight to the Spanish auxiliary verb.

Specifically, for the first research question we
employed again the model described in Section 2.3
(“haber-model”), and we tested it on 1000 novel
messages: 500 progressive sentences (e.g., “the
boy is kicking a ball”) and 500 that were the
perfect-tense equivalent of those sentences (“the
boy has kicked a ball”). As in the previous ex-
periment (Section 3), we activated both languages
after the first word of each sentence had been pro-
duced.

For the second model (“tener-model”), we re-
placed all the instances of “haber” with “tener”
in the training set (e.g., “el niño ha comido”;
“the boy has eaten” became “el niño tiene co-
mido”). We kept everything else the same (1000
test messages, initialized weights, lexicon size
even though “haber” was no longer used, and all
the layer sizes), and we ran 60 simulations using
the modified input. Because “tener” is also used as
an independent main verb with semantic content,
we hypothesized that this model will not show the
asymmetry.



28

In order to have a fair comparison between the
two models, we only analyzed the simulations that
had successfully learned to produce at least 75%
of the sentences for both models.1 Five simula-
tions failed in the “haber-model” model and eight
in the “tener-model”, thus leading to a total of 47
simulations to be analyzed.

4.3 Results
Even without any manipulations, the “haber-
model” showed a strong preference for progres-
sive participle switches: 4.16% vs 2.18% for the
perfect participle switches. Figure 4 (left) shows
the average percentage of Spanish-to-English par-
ticiple switches over 47 simulations per aspect
(progressive and perfect).

Figure 5 shows the percentage of code-switches
at the auxiliary verb and participle for the progres-
sive and perfect structure, after 30 training epochs.
In the progressive aspect, the simulations did not
show a preference for a switch at the auxiliary; it is
equally likely compared to a switch at the partici-
ple, thus reflecting prior experimental and corpus-
based results (Guzzardo Tamargo et al., 2016). In
the perfect structures, on the other hand, a switch
at the participle is much less likely than a switch
at the auxiliary position.

When tested on the same 1000 messages, the
“tener-model” (that substituted the original Span-
ish auxiliary verb from the “haber-model” for one
with more semantic weight) did not show a prefer-
ence for progressive participle switches (2.91% vs
2.63%; Figure 4, right).

Figure 5: Percentages of code-switches at the auxiliary
and participle for the progressive and perfect aspect,
after 30 epochs. Error bars show the SEM computed
over 47 simulations.

1The “sameness” of the simulations is judged by the sim-
ulation number which indicates the seed for the initialized
weights and the generated input.

4.4 Discussion

We tested whether the auxiliary phrase asymmetry
in Spanish-English code-switching could be de-
rived from the properties of the two languages.
The “haber-model” simulated the attested asym-
metry and the “tener-model” tested whether the
cause could be attributed to the Spanish auxiliary
“haber” that only has a limited, dependent syntac-
tic function (i.e., is more grammaticalized) and is
not used as frequently as the English equivalent
(“have”). The two simulations confirm that the
grammaticalization account could be responsible
for the asymmetry.

5 Conclusion

We have presented a novel method to test hypothe-
ses in code-switched sentence production. This
computational cognitive model can easily be mod-
ified to simulate code-switched production of a
different language pair. Additionally, the gen-
erated input allows for manipulations that help
test other hypotheses about code-switching, for
instance the idea that cognates can trigger code-
switched speech (Clyne, 1980).

Acknowledgments

The work presented here was funded by the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
(NWO) Gravitation Grant 024.001.006 to the Lan-
guage in Interaction Consortium.

References
Barbara E. Bullock and Almeida Jacqueline Toribio.

2009. Trying to hit a moving target: On the so-
ciophonetics of code-switching. Multidisciplinary
Approaches to Code Switching, 41:189–206.

Franklin Chang. 2002. Symbolically speaking: A con-
nectionist model of sentence production. Cognitive
Science, 26:609–651.

Michael G. Clyne. 1980. Triggering and language
processing. Canadian Journal of Psychology/Revue
canadienne de psychologie, 34(4):400.

Jeffrey L. Elman. 1990. Finding structure in time.
Cognitive Science, 14(2):179–211.

Roberto Filippi, Themis Karaminis, and Michael S.C.
Thomas. 2014. Language switching in bilingual
production: Empirical data and computational mod-
elling. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
17(2):294–315.

https://benjamins.com/catalog/sibil.41.12bul
https://benjamins.com/catalog/sibil.41.12bul
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1207/s15516709cog2605_3
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1207/s15516709cog2605_3
https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1982-03225-001
https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1982-03225-001
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1207/s15516709cog1402_1
https://repository.edgehill.ac.uk/10151/1/Filippi_etal_inpress_bilingual_switching.pdf
https://repository.edgehill.ac.uk/10151/1/Filippi_etal_inpress_bilingual_switching.pdf
https://repository.edgehill.ac.uk/10151/1/Filippi_etal_inpress_bilingual_switching.pdf


29

Stefan L Frank, Padraic Monaghan, and Chara
Tsoukala. in press. Neural network models of lan-
guage acquisition and processing. In Peter Hagoort,
editor, Human Language: from Genes and Brains to
Behavior. The MIT Press.

Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2018. Language
modeling for code-switching: Evaluation, integra-
tion of monolingual data, and discriminative train-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.11895.

François Grosjean. 2001. The bilingual’s language
modes. In Janet L. Nicol, editor, One mind, two lan-
guages: Bilingual language processing, pages 1–22.
Oxford: Blackwell.

Gualberto A Guzmán, Joseph Ricard, Jacqueline Seri-
gos, Barbara E Bullock, and Almeida Jacqueline
Toribio. 2017. Metrics for modeling code-switching
across corpora. In INTERSPEECH, pages 67–71.

Rosa E. Guzzardo Tamargo, Jorge R. Valdés Kroff, and
Paola E. Dussias. 2016. Examining the relationship
between comprehension and production processes in
code-switched language. Journal of Memory and
Language, 89:138–161.

Marius Janciauskas and Franklin Chang. 2018. In-
put and age-dependent variation in second language
learning: A connectionist account. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 42:519–554.

Pieter Muysken. 2000. Bilingual Speech: A Typology
of Code-Mixing. Cambridge University Press.

Carol W. Pfaff. 1979. Constraints on language mix-
ing: intrasentential code-switching and borrowing in
Spanish/English. Language, pages 291–318.

Shana Poplack. 1980. Sometimes I’ll start a sentence
in Spanish y termino en Español: toward a typology
of code-switching. Linguistics, 18(7-8):581–618.

Thamar Solorio and Yang Liu. 2008. Learning to pre-
dict code-switching points. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 973–981. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Chara Tsoukala, Stefan L. Frank, and Mirjam
Broersma. 2017. “He’s pregnant”: simulating the
confusing case of gender pronoun errors in L2. Pro-
ceedings of the 39th Annual Conference of the Cog-
nitive Science Society, pages 3392–3397.

Emre Yılmaz, Henk van den Heuvel, and David van
Leeuwen. 2016. Investigating bilingual deep neu-
ral networks for automatic recognition of code-
switching Frisian speech. Procedia Computer Sci-
ence, 81:159–166.

http://stefanfrank.info/pubs/FrankMonaghanTsoukala.pdf
http://stefanfrank.info/pubs/FrankMonaghanTsoukala.pdf
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.11895
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.11895
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.11895
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.11895
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.67.8252&rep=rep1&type=pdf
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.67.8252&rep=rep1&type=pdf
https://www.isca-speech.org/archive/Interspeech_2017/pdfs/1429.PDF
https://www.isca-speech.org/archive/Interspeech_2017/pdfs/1429.PDF
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5489134/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5489134/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5489134/
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/cogs.12519
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/cogs.12519
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/cogs.12519
http://catdir.loc.gov/catdir/samples/cam032/99056423.pdf
http://catdir.loc.gov/catdir/samples/cam032/99056423.pdf
https://www.jstor.org/stable/412586
https://www.jstor.org/stable/412586
https://www.jstor.org/stable/412586
https://yorkspace.library.yorku.ca/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10315/2506/CRLC00161.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
https://yorkspace.library.yorku.ca/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10315/2506/CRLC00161.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
https://yorkspace.library.yorku.ca/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10315/2506/CRLC00161.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D08-1102
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D08-1102
https://mindmodeling.org/cogsci2017/papers/0639
https://mindmodeling.org/cogsci2017/papers/0639
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050916300588
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050916300588
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050916300588

