






















































IDION: A database for Modern Greek multiword expressions


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multiword Expressions and WordNet (MWE-WN 2019), pages 130–134
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

130

 

 

 

Abstract 

We report on the ongoing development of 

IDION, a web resource of richly 

documented multiword expressions 

(MWEs) of Modern Greek addressed to 

the human user and to NLP. IDION 

contains about 2000 verb MWEs 

(VMWEs) of which about 850 have been 

documented as regards their syntactic 

flexibility, their semantics and the 

semantic relations with other VMWEs. 

Sets of synonymous MWEs are defined in 

a bottom-up manner revealing the 

conceptual organisation of the MG 

VMWE domain.  

1 Introduction 

We report on the ongoing development of IDION, 

a web resource of multiword expressions (MWEs) 

of Modern Greek (MG).
 1

  IDION is addressed to 

the human user and to NLP systems. By now, it 

contains 2000 Greek verb MWEs (VMWEs) that 

mostly fall in the idioms and light verb 

constructions categories of  the PARSEME 

annotation guidelines (Savary et al., 2018), of 

which 850 are fully documented and available 

under a CC-BY-NC license. It has been developed 

by a small team of editors who did documentation 

work and edited material collected with 

crowdsourcing (about 35 University students of 

                                                             
1 This research has been partly financed by the European 
Regional Development Fund of the European Union and 
Greek national funds through the Operational Program 

Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under 
the call RESEARCH – CREATE – INNOVATE: (Τ1ΕΔΚ- 
999723442). 
 

literature participated). The editors compiled a list 

of VMWEs drawing on published collections, 

e.g., Sarantakos (2013), dictionaries, e.g., 

Lexigram, and their intuitions as native speakers 

of MG; the encoders received a short VMWE list 

and a documentation manual. 

In Section 2 we discuss challenging 

documentation issues.  We pay some attention to 

VMWE emphasis (Section 3) and synonymy 

(Section 4). Section 5 is about the developed web 

editor. Section 6 concludes the presentation.  

2 The documentation 

Like other MWE databases, which are mentioned 

as our discussion proceeds, IDION serves both 

the human user and the NLP (Smørdal 

Losnegaard et al., 2016).  Gantar et al. (2018) list 

the MWE properties documented in seven 

dictionaries and NLP databases: phrase structure, 

variants, morphology of MWE elements, 

contingency of MWE parts, usage example and 

definition. IDION documents a superset of the 

listed properties (Table 1). 

We have defined a ‘template’ (Section 5) 

consisting of fields that we fill according to a set 

of specifications for the encoding of the MWE 

properties (Fellbaum and Geyken, 2005). Table 1 

approximates the design of the IDION template. 

2.1 Entry and lemma definition 

A new entry is defined with the unique coupling 

of a lemma and a definition because lemmas may 

be coupled with more than one definitions 

(polysemy), e.g., vgazo ta sothika mu, Lit. I take 

out my guts, is the lemma of five entries meaning 

“I throw up”, “I express my deeper feelings”, “I 

IDION: A database for Modern Greek multiword expressions 

 
Stella Markantonatou 

ILSP/Athena RIC,  

Athens, Greece 

stiliani.markantonatou@ 

gmail.com 

 

Panagiotis Minos 

ILSP/Athena RIC, 

Athens, Greece  

pminos@gmail.com 

 

George Zakis 

ILSP/Athena RIC, 

Athens, Greece  

georgizak@gmail.com 

 

Vassiliki Moutzouri  

National and Kapodistrian University  

of Athens, Greece 

vasiliki.moutzouri96@gmail.com 

 

Maria Chantou 

University of Patras, Greece 

mariachant96@gmail.com 

 

 

 
 

mailto:vasiliki.moutzouri96@gmail.com


131

 

 

 

cough violently”, “I sing loudly”, “I bust a gut”. 

We use the IDION definition(s) of the VMWE in 

the contexts where the VMWE was found in order 

to decide whether multiple entries should be 

defined. On the other hand, the VMWEs 

troo/katapino/cha(ft/v)o/masao to paramithi, Lit. I 

eat/swallow/swallow/chew the story, “I swallow 

something hook, line and sinker” define four 

entries encoded both as lexical variants, as they 

have different fixed verb heads, and as synonyms, 

as they are assigned the same definition.
2
  

Table 1: VMWE properties encoded in IDION. 

The relatively free word order of MG allows us 

to use two (default) ‘canonical’ (maximal) orders:  

Free(NP_Subject) + Fixed(+Verb+NP_Direct 

Object + PPs)+Free(XPs) and  Fixed(NP Subject 

+Verb+ NP Direct Object+PPs)+Free(XPs) for the 

lemma definition provided that no other more 

                                                             
2 Synonymous MWEs with identical verb heads and 

different fixed NP parts define distinct entries unless the 
fixed NP parts are morphological variants such as gender 
variables, for instance nerofida.FEM-nerofido.NEUT 
``grass snake", or diminutives. 

frequent order exists, e.g., (1) is used in the word 

order PP + Direct Object(Clitic) + Verb. 

Additionally to the lemmatisation conditions used 

in MG grammar we postulate that: (i) tenses are 

divided into past, present and future ones and (ii) 

the ‘order’ of grammatical persons is 

1st>2nd>3rd, e.g., (1) appears with 2nd/3rd 

person subjects only and 1st person singular 

possessives, therefore the verb’s ‘lemma’ is in the 

2nd person singular.   

The maximum length of the fixed string may 

vary (Fellbaum and Geyken, 2005).  We model 

this phenomenon as optionality denoted with 

brackets (2). Variation on fixed functional parts 

such as prepositions is indicated on the lemma 

form with disjunction (2). 

 

(1) apo to stoma mu to pernis 

Lit.  from the mouth mine it.CL take.2nd.SG  

“you say exactly what I was about to say before I 

utter it” 

(2) afino (gia / os) kavatza kati  

Lit.  leave (for / as) buffer something 

“I put something aside” 

2.2 Morphosyntactic information 

We use a template that facilitates encoding 

(Figure 1) to structure an NLP oriented 

representation of the VMWE in an as much as 

possible theory independent way mainly aiming at 

reusability and less at representing linguistic 

generalisations (Villavicencio et al., 2004): the 

theoretical constructs used are part-of-speech 

(PoS) and simple phrasal categories (NP, VP). 

Information about contingency, subject control, 

anaphor binding and optionality is provided. We 

use regular expressions on the MG PAROLE 

(Labropoulou et al., 1996) to exhaustively 

document the morphological constraints on the 

VMWE parts. Figure 1 shows the encoding of the 

morphological constraints on (1): verb person is 

constrained to 2nd and 3rd, verb/clitic number is 

not constrained and the possessive is specified as 

1st singular (Xx=unspecified value in a closed set 

of values).   The free parts of the MWE are 

characterised for phrasal category and, in the case 

of NPs, for case and animacy.  More than one 

NLP-oriented representations can be defined for 

the same VMWE enabling us to treat certain types 

of lexical variation without creating a new lemma, 

namely lexical variation on functional categories 

(2) and morphological variation/diminutives on 

Lemma 

form 

 

Translations English, French 

Codification 

for NLP 

lemma: 

-cranberry words (if any) 

-free XPs (NPs, VPs) 

-optional  lemmas   

-morphological constraints 

-contingency 

-control and binding 

-case, animacy  (free NPs) 

Corpus web, introspection 

literal usages 

Syntactic 

flexibility 

and 

Verb   

alternations 

-word order permutations 

-fixed NPs cliticisation 

-XP interpolation 

-passivisation 

-causatives-inchoatives 

-dative genitives, other 

Lexical 

variation 

-multiple entries 

-optionality, disjunction 

Semantics -definition 

-polysemy    

-opposites 

-semantic pairs 

-MWEs in the Possessive and 

Stative relations 

-polarity, style, emphasis 

-sets of synonymous MWEs 



132

 

 

 

fixed content parts. An experiment to convert the 

NLP oriented representation to an XLE/LFG 

lexicon was successful (Minos et al., 2016). 

Seven syntactic flexibility tests (free or fixed 

subject, word order permutations, whether an XP 

(=NP, AdjP, AdvP, …) can be inserted among the 

lexicalised parts of the VMWE, passivisation,  

dative genitive alternation (3), fixed object NP 

cliticisation and causative-inchoative alternation) 

are exemplified with corpus examples.  

(3) mu spas ta nevra - spas ta nevra mu 

Lit. me.DATGEN break.2nd the nerves - 

break.2nd the nerves mine.POSS 

“you grate on me” 

 

Figure 1: Representation of (1) for NLP purposes. 

2.3 Collection of annotated examples 

Because there are no sizeable corpora of MG, 

examples are retrieved from the web (about 8 

examples/VMWE).  Introspective examples (less 

than 10% in total) mainly demonstrate the 

unacceptability of certain structures. Examples are 

selected to illustrate the syntactic flexibility of the 

VMWE and whether it accepts emphasis; in short, 

the corpus contains examples annotated for 

acceptability and the phenomena they exemplify.   

Literal examples are included if the MWE accepts 

both a literal and a fixed interpretation. The 

corpus currently offers only evidence about the 

participation (or not) of a VMWE to a certain 

linguistic phenomenon; crucially, it provides no 

frequency information. Other databases drawing 

on large corpora include frequency information 

[DuELME, Gregoire (2010); The Berlin Idiom 

Project, Fellbaum and Geyken (2005)].  We plan 

to enhance IDION with the ability of encoding the 

frequence of occurrence of the VMWE alternants.  

2.4 Semantics 

IDION documents a set of semantic relations 

among VMWEs (Table 1).  Online dictionaries 

and lexicographic databases, such as Algemeen 

Nederlands Woordenboek, WordNet, provide 

synonyms and opposites. We devised the term 

‘semantic pair’ to denote pairs of morphologically 

unrelated predicates that stand in a causative/non-

causative relation (4). The ‘Opposite’ relation is 

encoded for VMWE pairs with opposite 

meanings; the ‘Stative’ relation for VMWE pairs 

that denote an event and a situation resulting from 

it, e.g., meno misos, Lit. I remain half, “I lose a lot 

of weight” - ime petsi ke kokalo, “I am skin and 

bones”; the ‘Possessive’ relation for VMWE pairs 

that denote an event and a result situation in 

which an entity has something in his/her 

‘possession/control’, e.g., vazo stin akri kati, Lit. I 

put at the edge something, “I lay up something” - 

echo stin akri kati, Lit. I have something at the 

edge, “I have something in store”.   

 

(4) afino anavdo kapion - meno anavdos 

Lit. leave.1st speechless somebody.ACC - stay.1st 

speechless.NOM 

“I leave somebody speechless - I become 

speechless”  

 

The ‘Verb alternation’ relation, e.g., erchete 

keramida se kapion, Lit. comes tile.SUBJ to 

somebody, “someone is floored”- kati erchete 

keramida se kapion, Lit. something comes as a 

tile to somebody, “something floors somebody” is 

an intransitive verb/verb-copula pair with the 

same verb head.  This set of relations, along with 

‘Synonymy’, will be exploited to define a 

network of VMWEs expressing a concept. Such 

concepts ‘emerge’ from the synonyms sets in a 

bottom-up way (Section 4), e.g., the concept in (1) 

or of being let down exactly the moment when a 

desire is about to be satisfied, etc. 

3 Polarity, Style and Emphasis  

IDION encodes polarity and style information 

[DuELME, Gregoire (2010); Polytropon, 

Fotopoulou et al. (2014)]. For style, the VMWE is 

assigned one of the values Formal, Colloquial, 

Offensive (Christopoulou, 2016). To distinguish 

between a formal and a colloquial VMWE, as a 

rule of thumb, formal VMWEs should occur in 

the political articles of established Greek 



133

 

 

 

newspapers. For polarity, three values are used, (-) 

for VMWEs occurring in negative environments 

only, (+) for VMWEs occurring in positive 

environments only and ‘unspecified’ otherwise.  

To the best of our knowledge, emphasis with 

VMWEs has received little attention in the 

international and MG literature (Gavriilidou, 

2013).  DuELME encodes fixed lexical modifiers 

of VMWEs and diminutives (Grégoire, 2010) 

both of which may express emphasis with MG 

VMWEs. To form an operational view of 

emphasis (a detailed view would require 

dedicated research), we have studied 180 

VMWEs encoded in IDION, 90 headed by the 

verb afino “leave” and 90  by the verb vazo “put”. 

Drawing on this and on IDION’s material, we 

assigned the values (+/-) to the feature Emphasis; 

e.g., the VMWE pino ton peridromo, Lit. I drink 

the catch (fishing) (Sarantakos, 2013), “to hit the 

bottle” has not been found in an emphatic 

construction yet and is assigned the value (-).  We 

observed that VMWEs often adopt the general 

MG emphasis mechanisms while certain VMWEs 

prefer own fixed emphatic means. We encoded 

fixed phrasal/ lexical emphasis as an optional part 

of the VMWE, for instance, ginome thirio 

(animero), Lit. I become beast (untamed.ADJ), “I 

fly off the handle” and diminutives with 

alternative NLP oriented representations and 

added a comment on their emphatic function.  

4 Sets of synonymous VMWEs  

IDION provides sets of synonymous VMWEs and 

indicates their style and emphasis similarities and 

differences (Figure 2: VMWEs about drinking a 

lot). Synonyms sets are defined in a bottom-up 

manner; IDION applies the transitive property on 

the pairs of synonymous VMWEs. Therefore, it is 

not necessary for the encoder to exhaust the list of 

possible synonyms of a VMWE and the 

synonyms sets are dynamic; each time the 

synonyms sets facility is called, the result reflects 

the current situation of IDION. Since about 80% 

of the IDION entries were documented with 

crowdsourcing, it was not advisable to pose strict 

specifications on the semantic relations because it 

would complicate the task and reduce the 

encoders' creativity.  Although the editors had to 

check the validity of the provided synonymous 

VMWEs against appropriate contexts, the 

encoders' creativity was proven valuable given the 

lack of large corpora and lexicographic resources 

of MG that would provide a variety of synonyms 

for each VMWE. The bottom-up definition of 

synonyms sets reveals the concepts which MG 

expresses with VMWEs---these concepts are not  

always expressed by existing MG verb predicates, 

eg. the concept “to let down somebody exactly 

when his/her desire is about to be satisfied”.  

5 The web editor 

The web editor is a PHP based application that 

takes advantage of the Symfony PHP framework, 

a set of reusable PHP components and a PHP 

framework for web applications (Shklar and 

Rosen, 2009). The data are stored in a database 

(MySQL) and a persistence provider (Doctrine) is 

used as a database abstraction layer between the 

database engine and the rest of the application, 

allowing for easy migration to any RDBMS. Only 

a web browser and a computer with an internet 

connection are required to access the editor that 

can be used from all major operating systems and 

browsers. An encoding ‘template’ is provided 

structured in 7 tabs: General, Forms (MWE 

morphosyntax), Usage example, Corpus, 

Diagnostics (flexibility tests), Relations and 

logistics tab. Editable controlled vocabularies in 

pull down menus and string matching facilities 

are used. Special machinery has been developed 

for defining and editing the semantic relations. 

6 Conclusion and future work 

IDION is a state-of-the-art resource addressed to 

humans and the NLP with detailed qualitative 

information about MG MWEs. Future priorities 

include: further populating IDION, adding more 

types of MWEs (nominal, adjectival, adverbial), 

developing the full network of semantic relations 

among VMWEs that define a “concept”, using the 

web to identify usage tendencies.  

Figure 2: Synonyms set for drinking a lot. 



134

 

 

 

References 

 
Algemeen Nederlands Woordenboek 

http://anw.inl.nl/search  

Doctrine https://www.doctrine-project.org/ 

Lexigram https://www.lexigram.gr/lex/enni/  

MySQL https://www.mysql.com/ 

PHP https://php.net/ 

Symfony https://symfony.com/ 

WordNet https://wordnet.princeton.edu/  

Katerina Christopoulou. 2016. A lexicological 

approach to the Modern Greek marginal 

vocabulary. PhD Thesis, University of Patras. 

Christiane Fellbaum and Alexander Geyken. 2005. 

Transforming a Corpus into a Lexical Resource 

The Berlin Idiom Project. Revue française de 

linguistique appliqué, X(2):49—62. 

https://www.cairn.info/revue-francaise-de-

linguistique-appliquee-2005-2-page-49.htm 

Aggeliki Fotopoulou, Stella Markantonatou, and 

Voula Giouli. 2014. Encoding MWEs in a 

conceptual lexicon. In Proceedings of the 10th 

Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE). 

Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 

43-47.     https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W14-0807. 

Polona Gantar, Lut Colman, Carla Parra Escartín, and 

Héctor Martínez Alonso. 2018. Multiword 

Expressions: Between Lexicography and NLP. 

International Journal of Lexicography, 

ecy012, https://doi.org/10.1093/ijl/ecy012  

Zoe Gavriilidou. 2013. Aspects of Intensity in Modern 

Greek. Thessaloniki: Kyriakidis Brothers, Ltd. 

ISBN 978-960-467-445-9. 

Nicole Grégoire. 2010. DuELME: a Dutch electronic 

lexicon of multiword expressions. Language 

Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-2):23–39.  

Penny Labropoulou, Elena Mantzari, Maria 

Gavrilidou. 1996. Lexicon-Morphosyntactic 

Specifications: Language Specific Instantiation- 

PP-PAROLE, MLAP (Report)  (1996). 

Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Federico Sangati, Carla 

Parra Escartín, Agata Savary, Sascha Bargmann, 

and Johanna Monti. 2016. PARSEME Survey on 

MWE Resources. In Proceedings of the 9th 

International Conference on Language Resources 

and Evaluation (LREC 2016). ELRA, pages 2299-

2306. 

Anne Osherson and Christiane Fellbaum. 2010. The 

Representation of Idioms in WordNet. In 

Proceedings of the Fifth Global WordNet 

Conference.  Mumbai, India. 

http://globalwordnet.org/2010/07/10/proceedings-

5th-gwa-conference-online-2/. 

Panagiotis Minos, Stella Markantonatou, George 

Zakis, Elpiniki Margariti. 2016. Generating 

LFG/XLEMWE entries from IDION (a theory 

neutral lexical DB) Parseme 6th general meeting in 

Struga/FYROM http://typo.uni-konstanz.de/ 

parseme/index.php/2-general/156-selected-posters-

struga-7-8-april-2016    

Nikos Sarantakos. 2013. “Logia toy aera” and more 

than 1000 fixed expressions. Athens: Publications 

of the 21st Century. 

Agata Savary et al. 2018. PARSEME multilingual 

corpus of verbal multiword expressions. In Stella 

Markantonatou, Carlos Ramisch, Agata Savary and 

Veronika Vincze (eds.), Multiword expressions at 

length and in depth: Extended papers from the 

MWE 2017 workshop, 87-147. Berlin: Language 

Science Press. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1471591 

Leon Shklar and Richard Rosen. 2009. Web 

Application Architecture: Principles, Protocols and 

Practices. West Sussex, England : John Wiley & 

Sons, Ltd. ISBN 978-0-470-51860-1. 

Aline Villavicencio, Timothy Baldwin, and Benjamin 

Waldron. 2004. A Multilingual Database of Idioms. 

In Proceedings of the Fourth International 

Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation (LREC 2004), pages 1127-1130. 

http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2004/. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

http://anw.inl.nl/search
https://www.doctrine-project.org/
https://www.lexigram.gr/lex/enni/
https://www.mysql.com/
https://php.net/
https://symfony.com/
https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
https://www.cairn.info/revue-francaise-de-linguistique-appliquee-2005-2-page-49.htm
https://www.cairn.info/revue-francaise-de-linguistique-appliquee-2005-2-page-49.htm
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijl/ecy012
http://globalwordnet.org/2010/07/10/proceedings-5th-gwa-conference-online-2/
http://globalwordnet.org/2010/07/10/proceedings-5th-gwa-conference-online-2/
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2004/

