



















































Simplification-induced transformations: typology and some characteristics


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2019 workshop, pages 309–318
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

309

Simplification-induced transformations: typology and some
characteristics

Anaı̈s Koptient1 Rémi Cardon2
1. {firstname.lastname}.etu@univ-lille.fr

2. {firstname.lastname}@univ-lille.fr
CNRS, Univ. Lille, UMR 8163 STL - Savoirs Textes Langage F-59000 Lille, France

Natalia Grabar2

Abstract
The purpose of automatic text simplification
is to transform technical or difficult to under-
stand texts into a more friendly version. The
semantics must be preserved during this trans-
formation. Automatic text simplification can
be done at different levels (lexical, syntactic,
semantic, stylistic...) and relies on the cor-
responding knowledge and resources (lexicon,
rules...). Our objective is to propose methods
and material for the creation of transformation
rules from a small set of parallel sentences dif-
ferentiated by their technicity. We also pro-
pose a typology of transformations and quan-
tify them. We work with French-language data
related to the medical domain, although we as-
sume that the method can be exploited on texts
in any language and from any domain.

1 Introduction

The purpose of automatic text simplification is to
provide a simplified version for a given text. Sim-
plification can be done at lexical, syntactic, seman-
tic but also pragmatic and stylistic levels. Sim-
plification can be useful in two main contexts: as
help provided to human readers, which guarantees
better access and understanding of the content of
documents (Son et al., 2008; Paetzold and Specia,
2016; Chen et al., 2016; Arya et al., 2011; Leroy
et al., 2013), and as a pre-processing step for other
NLP tasks and applications, which makes easier
the work of other NLP modules and may improve
the overall results (Chandrasekar and Srinivas,
1997; Vickrey and Koller, 2008; Blake et al., 2007;
Stymne et al., 2013; Wei et al., 2014; Beigman
Klebanov et al., 2004). We can see that potentially
this task may play an important role.

Three main types of methods are currently ex-
ploited in text simplification:

• Methods based on knowledge and rules. For
instance, the use of WordNet (Miller et al.,

1993) may provide equivalent expressions for
difficult words (Carroll et al., 1998; Bautista
et al., 2009), or help with the choice of
synonyms using their frequency (Devlin and
Tait, 1998; De Belder and Moens, 2010; Drn-
darevic et al., 2012) or their length (Bautista
et al., 2009). One limitation of such methods
is their weak recall performance (De Belder
and Moens, 2010) and confusion between
difficult and simple words (Shardlow, 2014);

• Methods based on distribution probabilities,
like word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013;
Pennington et al., 2014), are used to ac-
quire a lexicon and substitution rules for
simplification. When trained on relevant
data (Wikipedia, Simple Wikipedia, PubMed
Central...), word embeddings can contain
simpler equivalents, that can be exploited to
perform the simplification (Glavas and Sta-
jner, 2015; Kim et al., 2016). Nonetheless,
such methods require consequent filtering to
keep only the best candidates. Those meth-
ods generally provide good coverage and,
when the filtering is efficient, good precision;

• Methods issued from machine translation
tackle the problem as translation from tech-
nical to simple text. A growing number
of works propose to exploit this type of
method to English texts (Zhao et al., 2010;
Zhu et al., 2010; Wubben et al., 2012; Sen-
nrich et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2016a,b; Zhang and Lapata, 2017; Ni-
sioi et al., 2017). They exploit corpora made
of parallel and aligned sentences, that mainly
derive from the Simple English Wikipedia -
English Wikipedia corpus (SEW-EW). Glob-
ally, those methods seem to maintain a bal-
ance between the quality of the simplifica-
tion, good coverage and precision.



310

Almost all the existing works address text sim-
plification in English, while other languages are
poorly described. Yet, whatever the method and
language it is necessary to have available suitable
resources for making the transformations required
by the task. This work is intended as a basis to de-
sign a method and to use it for preparing linguistic
data for the creation of transformation rules.

2 Linguistic Data

We exploit an existing corpus with compara-
ble documents1 differentiated by their technicity:
technical documents and the corresponding sim-
plified documents. The corpus is composed of
documents from three sources: information on
drugs, encyclopedia articles and abstracts from
systematic reviews. We use simple and simpli-
fied interchangeably in our work. Yet, a simplified
document is the result of the simplification pro-
cess of a technical document, like the simplified
abstracts from systematic reviews; while a simple
document is issued from an independently written
simple document, like drug information and ency-
clopedia articles. In the used corpus, the techni-
cal part contains over 2.8M occurrences, and the
simplified part contains over 1.5M occurrences. A
subset of this corpus has been manually aligned at
the level of sentences, which provides 663 pairs
of parallel sentences exploited in our work. These
pairs of sentences show two types of relations:

• Semantic equivalence: two sentences of a
pair have the same or very close meaning:
- les sondes gastriques sont couramment
utilisées pour administrer des médicaments
ou une alimentation entérale aux personnes
ne pouvant plus avaler(feeding tubes are often
used to administer medicine or enteral nutrition to peo-

ple who cannot swallow)

- les sondes gastriques sont couramment
utilisées pour administrer des médicaments
et de la nourriture directement dans le trac-
tus gastro-intestinal (un tube permettant de
digérer les aliments) pour les personnes ne
pouvant pas avaler (feeding tubes are often used
to administer medicine and food directly into the gas-

trointestinal tract (a tube that allows to digest food))

With the semantic equivalence, simplifica-
tion is mainly performed at lexical level, typ-

1http://natalia.grabar.free.fr/
resources.php

ically using lexical substitutions. Simplifi-
cation can also be done by adding informa-
tion and, in this case, complex notions are
followed by their explanations, like le trac-
tus gastro-intestinal (un tube permettant de
digérer les aliments). Often, those two pro-
cesses (substitution and addition of informa-
tion) are applied jointly;

• Semantic inclusion: the meaning of one
sentence is included in the meaning of the
other sentence. The inclusion is oriented: the
technical sentence as well as the simplified
sentence can be inclusive or included. In this
example, the technical sentence is inclusive
and informs in addition on the number of
participants and the evaluation metric:
- peu de données (43 participants) étaient
disponibles concernant la détection d’un
mauvais placement (la spécificité) en rai-
son de la faible incidence des mauvais
placements (only a few data (43 participants)
were available concerning the detection of a bad

placement (specificity), due to the weak incidence of

bad placements)

- cependant, peu de données étaient
disponibles concernant les sondes placées
incorrectement et les complications possibles
d’une sonde mal placée (however, only a few
data were available concerning the badly placed

probes and the potential complications of a bad probe

placement)

With inclusion, simplification is also pe-
formed at the syntactic level, as the example
above illustrates. Typically, subordinate and
inserted clauses, information between brack-
ets, some adjectives of adverbs are deleted
during the simplification, like the informa-
tion between brackets (43 participants and la
spécificité). Semantic inclusion also involves
enumerations: technical sentences with
coordination can be segmented into lists with
separate items in the simplified versions.
Yet, enumerations with comma-separated
items can be found in either technical and
simplified documents. We should also point
out that syntactic and lexical transformations
often occur together.

http://natalia.grabar.free.fr/resources.php
http://natalia.grabar.free.fr/resources.php


311

Figure 1: Matrix-based alignment of words within YAWAT

3 Methods

The methods for annotating and preparing the lin-
guistic data for the description of simplification-
induced transformations rely on three main dimen-
sions: (1) control of the semantic inclusion re-
lations, when sentences are split or merged dur-
ing the simplification (Section 3.1); (2) semantic
annotation of pairs of sentences to describe more
precisely the transformations (Section 3.2); and
(3) syntactic tagging and analysis for joining the
semantic and syntactic information (Section 3.3).

3.1 Merging and Splitting of Sentences
One typical strategy applied during text simplifi-
cation consists in merging or splitting the tech-
nical sentences when creating simple sentences
(Brouwers et al., 2014). When merged, the techni-
cal sentences become shorted, which allows their
merging into one sentence which yet remains read-
able in the simplified version. On contrary, when
a given technical sentence contains more than one
clause, like one main and one secondary, it can be
split into two sentences by transforming the sec-
ondary clause into the main clause of another sen-
tence. Sometimes, the splitting should be blocked
because it can make the understanding of the main
clause more difficult (Brunato et al., 2014).

In our corpus, merged and split sentences are
detected using their proximity in the corpus and
multiple alignments, like in these examples:

T1 elle impose l’ arrêt du traitement et contre-
indique toute nouvelle administration de clin-
damycine. (It forces the stopping of the cure and it
is contra-indicated to administer once again the clin-

damycin.)

S1 prévenez votre médecin immédiatement car
cela impose l’ arrêt du traitement. (tell it to

your doctor immediately for it forces the stopping of

the cure.)

cette réaction va contre-indiquer toute nou-
velle administration de clindamycine. (this re-
sponse contra-indicates any new administration of the

clindamycin.)

T2 abcès. (abscess)
douleurs. (pain)

S2 douleurs ou accumulation de pus au niveau
du site d’ injection (pain or accumulation of pus at
the injection site)

Note that in the case of merging, the complex
sentences when they are merged get also other
simplifications, such as synonymy for instance.

3.2 Semantic Annotation

The simplification-induced transformations are
annotated semantically using YAWAT (Yet An-
other Word Alignment Tool) (Germann, 2008).
YAWAT permits to visualize and manipulate paral-
lel texts. The tool was designed for working with
parallel bilingual texts related to mutual transla-
tions (Yu et al., 2012). We propose to exploit it
with monolingual parallel texts related to simpli-
fication. YAWAT displays the two parallel and
aligned sentences side by side. The annotator can
then align the words using the matrix (Figure 1),
and to assign the type of transformation to each
pair of text segments considered. The number
of squares displayed vertically correspond to the
number of words that are counted in the sentence
on the left (that is, the technical sentence). The
number of squares displayed horizontally corre-
spond to the number of words that are counted
in the sentence on the right (that is, the simple
sentence). Then, in order to match word/group



312

Figure 2: Annotation scheme within YAWAT

of words that correspond to a simplification phe-
nomenon, the user has to click on the square that
corresponds in both sentences. The fact that the
text in the two columns are the same permits the
user to click on the right square easily. The trans-
formation types permits to describe more precisely
their semantic nature. We defined a set of trans-
formation types using previous similar work and
observations on our corpus (Brunato et al., 2014).
The proposed typology contains up to 25 transfor-
mations (Figure 2):

• literal is the default value which is kept when
the words are identical in both sentences,

• synonym: substitution of technical term by
its synonym {effets négligeables ; effets
délétères} ({insignificant effects ; deleterious ef-
fects}),

• hyperonym: technical term is replaced by
its hyperonym {clindamicine ; médicament}
({clindamycin ; drug}),

• hyponym: technical term is replaced by its
hyponym {benzodiazépines ; bromazepam}
({benzodiazepine ; bromazepam})

• p2a (and a2p): verb in passive voice in tech-
nical sentence is replaced by its active voice
{ne doit jamais être utilisé ; ne prenez ja-
mais} ({should never be used ; never use}), and
the contrary {n’a aucun ; n’est pas attendu}
({does not have ; is not expected})

• pronominalization: substitution by pronouns
{l’antibioprophylaxie ; elle} ({the antibiotic
prophylaxis ; it}),

• p2n: substitution of pronoun by its reference
{elles ; ce médicament} ({they ; this drug}),

• v2n (and n2v): substitution of verbs by nouns
{conduire ; conduite} ({to drive ; driving}), and
the contrary {l’arrêt du traitement ; arrêter
brutalement} ({cessation of treatment ; stop at
once})

• n2a (and a2n): substitution of nouns by their
adjectives {allergies ; allergiques} ({allergies ;
allergic}), and the contrary {cardiaque ; du
coeur} ({cardiac ; of the heart}),

• s2p (and p2s): substitution of singular
forms by plural forms {de tout antibio-
tique ; d’antibiotiques} ({of any antibiotic ; of
antibiotics}), and the contrary {les enfants ;
l’enfant} ({the children ; the child}),

• specification: adding explanation to techni-
cal term {bêta-lactamines ; bêta-lactamines
(pénicilline, céphalosporine)} ({beta-lactam ;
beta-lactam (penicillin, cephalosporins)}). The dif-
ference with synonymy is that, instead of sub-
stitution, the technical term remains and its
explanation (definition, examples) is added,

• generalization: removal of some information
{arrêt du traitement et contre indique toute
nouvelle administration du clindamycine ;
arrêt du traitement} ({cessation of treatment
and contra-indicate any new administration of clin-

damycine ; cessation of treatment}),

• duplication: two or more occurrences of a
given term in simple sentence,



313

• adj2adv (and adv2adj): substitution of ad-
jectives by adverbs {récente ; récemment}
({recent ; recently}), and the contrary {tardif ;
tard} ({late ; late}),

• agt2act (and act2agt): substitution of
agent by the action {conducteurs ; con-
duite} ({drivers ; driving}), and the contrary
{conduite ; conducteurs} ({driving ; drivers}),

• cau2eff (and eff2cau): substitution of cause
by its effect {prescrits ; utilisés} ({prescribed ;
used}), and the contrary {dans le traitement ;
chez les patients atteints} ({during the treatment ;
in affected patients}),

• aff2neg (and neg2aff): substitution of affir-
mative form of information by negative form
with the same meaning {présentant une ab-
sence complète ; n’avez aucune} ({indicating
total absence ; you have no}), and the contrary {ne
pas ; éviter} ({should not ; avoid}).

Since it is common that some sequences can
be tagged with several concurrent tags, we de-
fined the priority rules, such as a2n > synonym,
like in {cardiaque ; du coeur} ({cardiac ; of the
heart}), because it describes the transformation
more precisely. Since it is common that some
sequences can be tagged with several concurrent
tags, we prioritized part-of-speech related tags
over synonymy because it is more precize, like in
{cardiaque ; du coeur} ({cardiac ; of the heart}). Sim-
ilarly, pronominalization is prioritized over verbal
features, and also all the lexical transformations
over syntactic transformations.

3.3 Syntactic Analysis

Syntactic analysis permits to linguistically anno-
tate the parallel sentences and to mark within them
the syntactic groups. Syntactic processing is done
with Cordial (Laurent et al., 2009), which per-
forms tokenization, POS-tagging, lemmatisation
and syntactic analysis into constituents. In Ta-
ble 1, we provide an example of Cordial tagging
and analysis for the sentence dalacine n’a aucun
effet ou qu’un effet négligeable sur l’aptitude à
conduire des véhicules et à utiliser des machines.
(dalacine has no effect or the effect is insignificant on the ca-

pacity to drive vehicles and to use machines.) We can see
that the sequence un effet négligeble (insignificant ef-
fect) belongs to the same syntactic group, stated in
column synt. group. Besides, the syntactic head is

nb. form POS tag synt. group
1 dalacine NCI 1
2 n’ ADV 3
3 a VINDP3S 3
4 aucun ADJIND 5
5 effet NCMS 5
6 ou COO -
7 qu’ ADV 3
8 un DETIMS 9
9 effet NCMS 9
10 négligeable ADJSIG 9
11 sur PREP 13
12 l’ DETDFS 13
13 aptitude NCFS 13
14 à PREP 15
15 conduire VINF 15
16 des DETDPIG 17
17 véhicules NCMP 17
18 et COO -
19 à PREP 20
20 utiliser VINF 20
21 des DETDPIG 22
22 machines NCFP 22
23 . PCTFORTE -

Table 1: Example of syntactic annotation by Cordial
(word position in the sentence, word form, POS tag,
and syntactic group)

effet (effect), which has the same number as the syn-
tactic groupe (9) and, being common noun (NC),
it characterizes this group as nominal phrase.

4 Results and Discussion

4.1 Merging and Splitting of Sentences

We counted 51 cases in which two of more techni-
cal sentences are merged into one simple sentence,
and 16 cases in which technical sentences are split
into two or more simple sentences. In a previous
work, it was noticed that the merging of sentences
during the simplification is rare (Brouwers et al.,
2014). Yet, in our corpus, we observe the con-
trary: much more technical sentences are merged
than split. We can see several explanations:

• The cited work (Brouwers et al., 2014) is
done on articles from Wikipedia and Vikidia.
Vikidia is designed for 8-13 year old children
and relies on strong guidelines when creating
the articles. One of the rules is to use short
and clear sentences. In our work, Wikipedia



314

and Vikidia correspond to the encycopedia
part of the corpus. The two other subcorpora
(drug leaflets and scientific abstracts) do not
respect same writing principles.

• Drug leaflets frequently use coordinations
with disorders, known adverse effects, func-
tions, etc. Often, they are presented as item-
ized lists in technical documents, while in
simplified documents then occur within co-
ordinated sentences.

• In abstracts of systematic reviews, techni-
cal sentences are often shortened during their
simplification in order to keep the main in-
formation. Then, possibly as consequence of
it, the sentences may be merged. Notice also
that there is no clear guidelines when writing
plain-language abstracts and that each editor
may apply its own principles.

4.2 Semantic Annotation
In Figure 3, we present the typology of the
simplification-induced transformations. The Fig-
ure also contains information on prevalence of
each transformation in terms of its frequence
and percentage. We distinguish several high-
level transformations, which may also be present
in the existing typologies (Brunato et al., 2014;
Brouwers et al., 2014): lexical substitution, lex-
ical addition, lexical deletion, syntactic substitu-
tion, pronominalization and use of affirmative and
negated forms. The biggest set of transformations
(965 occurrences, 69%) is related to lexical sub-
stitutions, within which we differentiate substitu-
tions with semantic shift (hyponymy and hyper-
onymy) and without semantic shift (synonymy and
morphological transformation). We subsequently
have lexical additions or specifications (199 oc-
currences, 14%), when explanations are added to
technical terms in simplifed sentences, and lexi-
cal deletions or generalizations (132 occurrences,
9%), when some information is shortened and re-
moved during the simplification. Then we con-
sider that the only pure syntactic substitutions cor-
repospond to active and passive voices of verbs.
Hence, singular/plural and other verbal features
belong to lexical substitutions without semantic
shift. Pronominalization, and use of positive and
negative equivalent expressions correspond to dis-
tinct small types of transformations.

By comparison with the typology from (Brouw-
ers et al., 2014), we separated synonymy from hy-

peronymy because they have fundamental differ-
ences (semantic equivalence or subsumption) and
require specific methods and resources. We differ-
entiate several syntactic and morphological trans-
formations, while in the citetd work, only the pas-
sive/active transformation is considered. Another
difference is that we do not differentiate betweel
lexical and semantic transformations: semantics
becomes a feature of lexical substitutions.

By comparison with the typology from
(Brunato et al., 2014), the authors differentiate
several types of word insertion and deletion,
according to the syntactic nature of these words
(verb, noun...). We do not make this differen-
tiation because, in most cases, insertions and
deletions apply to syntactic clauses. Besides, we
considered the shift of grammatical categories as
lexical substitution, which we describe with detail
according to the POS categories. Unlike in the
cited work, we consider separately hyperonymy,
hyponymy and synonymy, because they have
fundamental differences and require specific
methods and resources.

Finally, by comparison with the typology from
(Vila et al., 2011), which is dedicated to the
general description of paraphrases and does not
specifically aim transformations due to the simpli-
fication, we notice several similarities. The main
difference is that the authors separated lexical sub-
stitutions and morphological derivations, which
we keep together because they all apply at the
word level. Yet, we can differentiate them through
the use of syntactic infomartion.

On the whole, we count 1,394 transformations,
which gives 2.1 transformations per pair of sen-
tences on average. In Table 2, we indicate the
frequency of the most frequent types of transfor-
mations according to whether they occur in split
or merged sentences, or generally in the corpus
(the total column). As in Figure 3, the most fre-
quent transformations are related to the use of syn-
onyms, and the specification and generalization of
contents. These types are frequent in the whole
corpus and, by consequence, in merged and split
sentences. There is no real association between
sentence splitting or merging and transformations.
At the more fine-grained level, we observe that:

• a2n (adjective → noun) transformations (53
occ.) may be necessary to replace adjectives,
often coined on suppletive bases (cardiac),
by the corresponding nouns, often coined on



315

Figure 3: Typology of simplification-induced transformations

alternative native bases (heart),

• hyperonymy transformations (48 occ.) permit
to use words with broader meaning, which
may make the understanding easier,

• hyponymy transformations (51 occ.) permit
to use instanciations and terms with narrower
meaning, which may also make the under-
standing easier,

• n2v (noun→ verb) transformations (35 occ.)
make the sentence less abstract by replacing
concept by the action, and hence easier to un-
derstand.

It may seem counter-intuitive that there are
more cases of hyponymy than hyperonymy in sim-
plification, however, this can be explained. In-
deed, in the simple side of the drug corpus, the
exact name of the drug is given, when on the tech-
nical side of the drug corpus, the name given is the
therapeutical class of the drug. For instance, there
is a case where we have IEC (ACE inhibitor) on the
technical side and Moex (the name of a drug) on
the simple side. Since Moex is a kind of IEC, then
Moex is a hyponym for IEC.



316

tag split merge total
syno 24 112 578
hypero 1 10 48
hypo 0 13 51
pronoun 9 2 74
v2n 1 1 17
n2v 2 5 35
n2a 2 0 16
a2n 2 17 53
s2p 0 6 53
p2s 5 3 38
vfea 0 4 41
specif 12 34 199
gener 14 10 132

Table 2: Frequency of the most frequent transforma-
tions in split and merged sentences, and in all the par-
allel sentences

4.3 Syntactic Analysis
Syntactic analysis permitted to associate seman-
tic and syntactic information. One issue is that,
with the substitutions, the POS-tags or syntactic
groups remain identical in 221 cases. In several
other cases, the original syntactic group is com-
pleted with other groups (GN → GP GN, GN →
GN GAdj). Besides, up to 531 transformations
start from nominal groups, up to 190 from prepo-
sitional groups and up to 174 from verbal groups.
Overall, this means that: (1) the syntactic anal-
ysis may provide important clues for the detec-
tion of frontiers of the sequences to transform; (2)
words and expressions of various syntactic nature
are involved in transformations (nouns, verbs, ad-
jectives...); (3) nouns and noun groups, often cor-
responding to concepts, occupy important place
among the transformations.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We proposed to work with parallel sentences dif-
ferentiated by their technicity: technical and sim-
plified contents are put in parallel. The main pur-
pose is to describe the transformations involved
during the simplification. Hence, the sentences
are characterized on three dimensions: splitting
and merging of sentences, semantic annotation of
the transformations, and their syntactic annota-
tion. We also propose a typology of transforma-
tions and quantify them. For instance, our work
indicates that among the most frequent transfor-
mations we can find: synonymy, specification (in-

sertion of additional information), generalization
(removal of information), pronominalization, sub-
stitution of adjectives by the corresponding nouns,
and swich between singular and plural forms. The
material prepared will be used for the creation of
transformation rules joining syntactic, lexical and
semantic information. These rules will be later
used for the simplification of biomedical texts.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by the French National
Agency for Research (ANR) as part of the CLEAR
project (Communication, Literacy, Education, Ac-
cessibility, Readability), ANR-17-CE19-0016-01.

The authors would like to thank the reviewers
for their questions and comments that helped in
improving the article.

References
Diana J. Arya, Elfrieda H. Hiebert, and P. David Pear-

son. 2011. The effects of syntactic and lexical com-
plexity on the comprehension of elementary science
texts. Int Electronic Journal of Elementary Educa-
tion, 4(1):107–125.

Susana Bautista, Pablo Gervás, and R. Ignacio Madrid.
2009. Feasibility analysis for semi-automatic con-
version of text to improve readability. In Int Conf
on Inform and Comm Technology and Accessibility
(ICTA), pages 33–40.

B Beigman Klebanov, K Knight, and D Marcu. 2004.
Text simplification for information-seeking applica-
tions. In R Meersman and Z Tari, editors, On the
Move to Meaningful Internet Systems 2004: CoopIS,
DOA, and ODBASE. Springer, LNCS vol 3290,
Berlin, Heidelberg.

Catherine Blake, Julia Kampov, Andreas Orphanides,
David West, and Cory Lown. 2007. Query expan-
sion, lexical simplification, and sentence selection
strategies for multi-document summarization. In
DUC.

Laetitia Brouwers, Delphine Bernhard, Anne-Laure
Ligozat, and Thomas François. 2014. Syntactic sen-
tence simplification for French. In PITR workshop,
pages 47–56.

Dominique Brunato, Felice Dell’Orletta, Giulia Ven-
turi, and Simonetta Montemagni. 2014. Defining
an annotation scheme with a view to automatic text
simplification. In CLICIT, pages 87–92.

J Carroll, G Minnen, Y Canning, S Devlin, and J Tait.
1998. Practical simplification of English newspaper
text to assist aphasic readers. In AAAI-98 Workshop
on Integrating Artifficial Intelligence and Assistive
Technology, pages 7–10.



317

R Chandrasekar and B Srinivas. 1997. Automatic in-
duction of rules for text simplification. Knowledge
Based Systems, 10(3):183–190.

Ping Chen, John Rochford, David N. Kennedy, Sous-
san Djamasbi, Peter Fay, and Will Scott. 2016. Au-
tomatic text simplification for people with intellec-
tual disabilities. In AIST, pages 1–9.

Jan De Belder and Marie-Francine Moens. 2010. Text
simplification for children. In Workshop on Accessi-
ble Search Systems of SIGIR, pages 1–8.

Siobhan Devlin and John Tait. 1998. The use of psy-
cholinguistic database in the simplification of text
for aphasic readers. In Linguistic Database, pages
161–173.

B Drndarevic, S Stajner, and H Saggion. 2012. Re-
porting simply: A lexical simplification strategy for
enhancing text accessibility. In Easy to read on the
web, pages 1–6.

Ulrich Germann. 2008. Yawat: Yet another word align-
ment tool. In ACL-08: HLT Demo Session, pages
20–23, Columbus, USA.

Goran Glavas and Sanja Stajner. 2015. Simplifying
lexical simplification: Do we need simplified cor-
pora? In ACL-COLING, pages 63–68.

Yea-Seul Kim, Jessica Hullman, Matthew Burgess, and
Eytan Adar. 2016. SimpleScience: Lexical simpli-
fication of scientific terminology. In EMNLP, pages
1–6.

D Laurent, S Nègre, and P Séguéla. 2009. L’analyseur
syntaxique Cordial dans Passage. In Traitement Au-
tomatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN).

Gondy Leroy, David Kauchak, and Obay Mouradi.
2013. A user-study measuring the effects of lexical
simplification and coherence enhancement on per-
ceived and actual text difficulty. Int J Med Inform,
82(8):717–730.

T Mikolov, K Chen, G Corrado, and J Dean. 2013. Ef-
ficient estimation of word representations in vector
space. In Workshop at ICLR.

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1993. In-
troduction to wordnet: An on-line lexical database.
Technical report, WordNet.

Sergiu Nisioi, Sanja Stajner, Simone Paolo Ponzetto,
and Liviu P. Dinu. 2017. Exploring neural text sim-
plification models. In Ann Meeting of the Assoc for
Comp Linguistics, pages 85–91.

Gustavo H. Paetzold and Lucia Specia. 2016. Bench-
marking lexical simplification systems. In LREC,
pages 3074–3080.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In EMNLP 2014, pages 1532–1543.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Improving neural machine translation models
with monolingual data. In Proc of the Ann Meet-
ing of the Assoc for Comp Linguistics, pages 86–96,
Berlin, Germany.

Matthew Shardlow. 2014. A survey of automated text
simplification. Int J Advanced Computer Science
and Applications, 1:1–13.

Ji Y. Son, Linda B. Smith, and Robert L. Gold-
stone. 2008. Simplicity and generalization: Short-
cutting abstraction in children’s object categoriza-
tions. Cognition, 108:626–638.

S Stymne, J Tiedemann, C Hardmeier, and J Nivre.
2013. Statistical machine translation with readabil-
ity constraints. In NODALIDA, pages 1–12.

D Vickrey and D Koller. 2008. Sentence simplifica-
tion for semantic role labeling. In Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics-HLT,
pages 344–352.

Marta Vila, M Antònia Mart, and Horacio Rodrı́guez.
2011. Paraphrase concept and typology. A linguisti-
cally based and computationally oriented approach.
Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 46:83–90.

Tong Wang, Ping Chen, Kevin Amaral, and Jipeng
Qiang. 2016a. An experimental study of LSTM
encoder-decoder model for text simplification. In
IJCAI, pages 1–7.

Tong Wang, Ping Chen, John Rochford, and Jipeng
Qiang. 2016b. Text simplification using neural ma-
chine translation. In Proc of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16), pages 4270–4271.

Chih-Hsuan Wei, Robert Leaman, and Zhiyong Lu.
2014. SimConcept: A hybrid approach for simpli-
fying composite named entities in biomedicine. In
BCB ’14, pages 138–146.

S Wubben, A van den Bosch, and E Krahmer. 2012.
Sentence simplification by monolingual machine
translation. In Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 1015–1024.

Wei Xu, Courtney Napoles, Ellie Pavlick, Quanze
Chen, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2016. Optimizing
statistical machine translation for text simplification.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 4:401–415.

Qian Yu, Aurélien Max, and François Yvon. 2012.
Revisiting sentence alignment algorithms for align-
ment visualization and evaluation. In BUCC work-
shop, pages 1–7.

Xingxing Zhang and Mirella Lapata. 2017. Sentence
simplification with deep reinforcement learning. In
Proc of the Conf on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 584–594, Copenhagen,
Denmark.



318

S Zhao, H Wang, and T Liu. 2010. Leveraging multiple
MT engines for paraphrase generation. In COLING,
pages 1326–1334.

Z Zhu, D Bernhard, and I Gurevych. 2010. A monolin-
gual tree-based translation model for sentence sim-
plification. In COLING 2010, pages 1353–1361.


