





























Abstract 
In this research, we extract causal information from 
textual data and construct a causality database in the 
economic field. Furthermore, we develop a method 
to produce causal chains starting from phrases rep-
resenting specific events and offer possible ripple 
effects and factors of specific events or situations. 
Using our method to Japanese textual data, we have 
implemented a prototype system that can display 
causal chains for user-entered words. A user can 
interactively edit the causal chains by selecting ap-
propriate causalities and deleting inappropriate 
causalities. In this project, we will apply our method 
to English textual data such as financial news arti-
cles and financial reports. The economic caus-
al-chain search algorithm can be applying to various 
financial information services.  

1 Introduction 
Economic news articles and financial reports contain various 
descriptions of cause and effect between economic factors 
such as price movements, product sales, employment, and 
trades. For example, “Hospital operator reconsiders London 
IPO because of Brexit uncertainty” and “the higher prices are 
likely to take a toll on manufacturers as well as consumers 
because the economy has decelerated greatly this quarter” 
appeared in Bloomberg Market News on March 21 2019.  

It is beneficial to construct a database of economic causality 
and analyze the relationship between causality for both fi-
nancial professionals and non-specialists. Such technology 
can support professionals’ report writing and businesses. For 
non-specialists, the technology can help them understand the 
implicit information about causal relationship behind the 
specialized texts.  

It is, however, difficult to analyze the causality between 
economic phenomena only by the statistical analysis of nu-
merical data. That is because human activities produce a 
causal relationship between economic phenomena. Human 
activities are determined by mental processes such as cogni-
tion, thinking, and emotion. Thus, economic causality is 
influenced by social and cultural situations. It is almost im-
possible to extract objective and universal causality by sta-

tistical analysis of numerical data like natural scientific 
phenomena. 

2 Technical ideas 
In this program, we analyze economic text data that seems to 
contain causality recognized by humans and construct a 
database of causality related to the economic field. Fur-
thermore, we develop a method to search for causal chains 
derived from phrases representing specific events. Using this 
method, we implement a system that can display causal 
chains for user's input words and select appropriate se-
quences or delete inappropriate sequences. Our method con-
sists of the following steps. 
1. Step 1 extracts sentences that include cause-effect ex-

pressions (causal sentences) from Japanese financial
statement summaries using a support vector machine. 

2. Step 2 obtains cause-effect expressions from the extracted
sentences using syntactic patterns.

3. Step 3 constructs economic causal chains by connecting
each cause-effect expression.

Step 1 and Step 2 are applied a method of [Sakaji et al., 
2017]. 

2.1 Step 1: Extraction of Causal Sentences 
We developed a method for extracting causal sentences from 
economic texts. Since this method uses a support vector 
machine (SVM) for extraction, we will now explain how to 
acquire features from financial statement summaries. To 
extract causal sentences, our method uses the features shown 
in Fig. 1. We employ both syntactic and semantic features. 

Economic Causal-Chain Search using Text Mining Technology 

Kiyoshi Izumi and Hiroki Sakaji 
School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan 

izumi@sys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp and sakaji@sys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

Figure 1: Table example 

61
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Financial Technology and Natural Language Processing 

(FinNLP@IJCAI 2019), pages 61-65, Macao, China, August 12, 2019.



We aim to use expressions that are frequently used in cause 
and effect expressions in sentences as syntactic features 

2.2 Step 2: Extracting Cause-Effect Expressions 
We employ a method by [Sakaji et al., 2008] to extract 
cause-effect expressions using four syntactic patterns. We 
analyzed sentence structures and used a pattern matching 
method with syntactic patterns is shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, 
“Cause” indicates a cause expression, “Effect” indicates an 
expression of effect and “Clue” indicates a clue expression. 

2.3 Step 3: Constructing Causal Chains 
To construct causal chains, our method [Nishumura et al., 
2018] connects an effect expression of a causal expression 
and a cause expression of another causal expression. We 
show an algorithm of causal chains construction in Fig. 3. 

In Fig. 3, “Company” indicates the company that issues the 

financial statement summary from which the cause–effect 
expression has been extracted. Additionally, “Date” is the 
date the financial statement summary was issued. In Fig. 3, 

 is a function that calculates similarity 
between the effect expression ei and the cause expression cj. 
Our method calculates the similarities based on vectors of 
word embedding. First, our method obtains word embedding 

average of the words included in the expressions. Here, we 
define the average obtained from the effect expression ei as 

 and the average obtained from the cause expression cj as 
. Where  and m is the dimension size of 

word embedding. Then, our method calculates a cosine sim-
ilarity between  and  and employs the similarity as 
similarity between the effect expression ei and the cause 
expression cj. Finally, our method acquires pairs of 
cause-effect expressions as causal chain when the similarities 
are larger than a threshold. 

3 Evaluation 
In this section, we evaluate our method until Step 2. For 
evaluation, we use 30 pdf files of Japanese financial state-
ment summaries and 30 documents of newspaper articles 
concerning business performance as test data. As results of 
human tagging, the 30 pdf files include 478 cause-effect 
expressions, the 30 documents include 51 cause-effect ex-
pressions. For classification of causal sentences, we use 
tagged 3,360 sentences that include 1,454 causal sentences. 
The tagger is an individual investor with 15 years of in-
vestment experience. We use MeCab 
(http://taku910.github.io/mecab/) for Japanese language 
morphological analyzer and CaboCha for Japanese depend-
ency parser [Kudo et al., 2002]. Moreover, we employ linear 
kernel as SVM kernel, and SVMLight as SVM. 

3.1 Evaluation Results 
Table 1 shows experiment results. From Table 1, the method 
presents good performance for Japanese financial statement 
summaries and newspaper articles concerning business per-
formance. Results of newspaper outperforms results of fi-
nancial summaries. Because the method was developed for 
extracting cause-effect expressions from newspaper articles. 
However, results of financial summaries satisfy sufficient 
performance to construct causal chains. Therefore, we think 
that the method performance is enough to construct causal 
chains from financial texts. 

4 Prototype system 
Based on the above-mentioned causal chain construction 
algorithm, the program of the basic framework of the eco-
nomic causal chain search system for Japanese texts was 
implemented. You can try this system at 
http://socsim.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ccs/. Based
on this system, we will develop English version of the sys-

Figure 2: A syntactic patterns list 

Figure 3: Construction of causal chains 

Table 1: Evaluation results 
Precision Recall F1 Number of 

extracted 
expressions 

Financial 
summaries 

0.82 0.62 0.71 360 

Newspaper 0.93 0.75 0.83 34 

62



tem. The behavior of this system is as follows. First, the user 
enters the start text (Fig. 4). The user can select the search 
direction, from cause to result or from result to cause. It is 

also possible to limit the search period of textual data. 
Click the search button to the right of the text box to display 
the causality chain from the input text (Fig. 5). By default, 
three causal relationships are displayed in descending order 
of similarities. If you want to see more causal relationships, 
you can click the "More" button to increase the display of 
causality nodes. If for each node of the causal relationship, 
the user determines that it is not appropriate, you can delete 
the node by pressing the delete button at the upper right of 
each node. 

If you want to further extend the causal chain from each 
node, click the ">" button on the right of each node, and the 
related causality is added with the clicked node as the ter-
minal node (Fig. 6). 
You can build the above-mentioned causal chain repeatedly 
and construct the causal chain required by the user, you can 
save the constructed causal chain in a file． 

5 Application images 
The current prototype system uses only small sized Japanese 
text, earnings summaries of Japanese firms. In order to im-
prove the precision and recall of acquired causal chains, it is 
necessary to expand the text data. In this research program, 
we study the following two things to improve the causality 
database. 
1. Expansion of a causal database using new text data such as

news articles.

2. Extraction of causal information from English documents
such as Form 10-k and press releases, and English da-
tabase construction. 

Our economic causal-chain search system and algorithm can 
be applied to various financial information services for both 
individual investors and financial professionals. Within the 
program period, we will implement the application service 
prototype program for any of the following application ser-
vices. After the end of the program, we would like to launch 
some of the following services in collaboration with financial 
institutions or financial information vendors.  

5.1 Services for Individual Investors 
For non-specialists, the technology can help them understand 
the implicit information about causal relationship behind the 
specialized texts. One of the causes of this difficulty is the 
large gap between the knowledge of everyday life and that of 
finance. From everyday events to financial market trends, 
there is a causal-chain with financial specific knowledge. The 
proposed method can implement a service that provides 
knowledge to fill this gap. 
(a) Presentation of background information in financial
documents.
Using our algorithm, a user can search related stocks and
possible factors derived from keywords and phrases in news
articles and economic document-level (Fig. 7). By the in-
fluence search, a user can know which stocks’ price may be
affected by specific economic events and situations denoted
in the documents. By the factor search, a user can know

Figure 4: Text box for entering start text 

Figure 5: Display of causal relationships 

Figure 6: Extended causal chains 

Figure 7: Influence and factor search from financial texts 

63



possible causes of specific economic events and situations. 
(b) Question Answering System.
Our algorithm can be applied to an interaction agent service
provided by financial institutions for individual investors.
Individual investors often want to ask basic questions to
financial specialists and advisors. Because face-to-face ad-
vice from financial professionals is expensive, automated
question answering leads to service penetration (Fig. 8).

5.2 Supports for Financial Professionals Services 
Our algorithm can be applied to a business support system for 
financial professionals in various departments of financial 
institutions such as market analysts and financial sales.  
(a) Support for market report writing.
The proposed method can help market analysts decide the
content when writing a report. For example, they search
whether there is any influence from a certain event to the
market to be explained, and decides whether this event
should be written in the report. In addition, for a certain price
movement, it is possible to search for potential factors and
check whether there are any factors that should be written in
the report.
(b) Sales support
Similar to the question answering system for individual in-
vestors mentioned above, when salespersons of a financial
institution sell their financial products to a customer, they can
search for stocks related to personal interests of the customer.
If related stocks are searched in advance in relation to the
interests of the customers, they can support sales activities.
Also, for questions from customers, the above-mentioned
question answering system can provide candidates for the
contents to be answered.

6 Related work 
Much work has been done on the extraction of causal in-
formation from texts. Inui et al. proposed a method for ex-
tracting causal relations (cause, effect, precond and means) 
from complex sentences containing the Japanese resultative 
connective “ため(tame: because)” [Inui et al., 2004], as this 
is a strong indicator of causal information. Khoo et al. pro-
posed a method to extract cause–effect information from 
newspaper articles by applying manually created patterns 
[Khoo et al., 1998], as well as a method to extract causal 
knowledge from medical databases by applying their graph-
ical patterns [Khoo et al., 2000]. Chang et al. proposed a 

method to extract causal relationships between noun phrases 
using cue expressions and word pair probabilities [Chang et 
al., 2006], defined as the probability that the pair forms a 
causal noun phrase. Girju proposed a method for automatic 
detection and extraction of causal relations based on cue 
phrases [Girju, 2003] where causal relations are expressed by 
pairs of noun phrases. Girju used WordNet [Fellbaum, 1998] 
to create semantic constraints for selecting candidate pairs, so 
her method cannot extract unknown phrases that are not in 
WordNet. Bethard et al. proposed a method for classifying 
verb pairs that have causal relationships [Bthard et al., 2008] 
using an SVM for classification. Sadek et al. proposed a 
method for extracting Arabic causal relations using linguistic 
patterns [Sadek et al., 2016] represented using regular ex-
pressions. In contrast, our method not only extract 
cause-effect expressions but also construct causal chains. 
 Ishii et al. proposed a method for constructing causal 
chains using WordNet and SVO tuples [Ishii et al., 2012]. 
They employ method of [Sakaji et al., 2008] for extracting 
cause-effect expressions. Alashri et al. proposed a method to 
extract causal relations and construct causal chains from 
large text corpora related to climate change [Alashri et al., 
2018]. However, their method can not construct causal 
chains when expressions consist of noun phrases. Because 
their method targets expressions that include Subjects, Verbs 
and Objects (SVO). On the other hand, our method is able to 
construct causal chains from expressions that consist noun 
phrases only. 

7 Conclusions 
We develop a method to produce causal chains starting from 
phrases representing specific events and offer possible ripple 
effects and factors of specific events or situations. Using our 
method to Japanese textual data, we have implemented a 
prototype system that can display causal chains for us-
er-entered words. A user can interactively edit the causal 
chains by selecting appropriate causalities and deleting in-
appropriate causalities. In this project, we will apply our 
method to English textual data such as financial news articles 
and financial reports. The economic causal-chain search 
algorithm can be applying to various financial information 
services.  

References 
[Alashri et al., 2018] Saud Alashri, Jiun-Yi Tsai, Anvesh 

Reddy Koppela, Hasan Davulcu: Snowball: Extracting 
Causal Chains from Climate Change Text Corpora, In the 
2018 1st International Conference on Data Intelligence 
and Security (ICDIS), pages 234-241, 2018. 

[Bthard et al., 2008] Steven Bthard, James H.Martin: 
Learning Semantic Links from a Corpus of Parallel 
Temporal and Causal Relations,  In Proceedings of the 
46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technologies, 
pages 177-180, 2008. 

Figure 8: Question Answering System for Individual Investors 

64



[Chang et al., 2006] Du-Seong Chang, Key-Sun Choi: In-
cremental Cue Phrase Learning and Bootstrapping 
Method for Causality Extraction Using Cue Phrase and 
Word Pair Probabilities, Information Processing and 
Management, pages 662-678, 2006. 

[Fellbaum, 1998] Christiane Fellbaum: WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database, The MIT Press, 1998. 

[Girju, 2003] Roxana Girju: Automatic detection of causal 
relations for Question Answering, In ACL Workshop on 
Multilingual Summarization and Question Answering, 
pages 76-83, 2003. 

[Inui et al., 2004] Takashi Inui, Kentaro Inui, Yuji Matsu-
moto: Acquiring Causal Knowledge from Text Using the 
Connective Marker tame, Journal of Information Pro-
cessing Society of Japan, pages 919-933, 2004. 

[Ishii et al., 2012] Hiroshi Ishii, Qiang Ma, Masatoshi Yo-
shikawa, Incremental Construction of Causal Network 
from News Articles, Journal of information processing, 
pages 207-215, 2012. 

[Khoo et al., 1998] Christopher S.G. Khoo, Jaklin Kornfilt, 
Robert N. Oddy, Sung Hyon Myaeng: Automatic Ex-
traction of Cause-Effect Information from Newspaper 
Text Without Knowledge-based Inferencing, Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, pages 177-186, 1998. 

[Khoo et al., 2000] Christopher S.G. Khoo, Syin Chan, Yun 
Niu: Extracting Causal Knowledge from a Medical Da-
tabase Using Graphical Patterns, In Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 336-343, 2000. 

[Kudo et al., 2002] Taku Kudo, Yuji Matsumoto: Japanese 
Dependency Analysis using Cascaded Chunking, In 
CoNLL 2002: Proceedings of the 6th Conference on 
Natural Language Learning 2002 (COLING 2002 
Post-Conference Workshops), pages 63-69, 2002. 

[Nishumura et al., 2018] Kohei Nishumura, Hiroki Sakaji, 
Kiyoshi Izumi: Creation of Causal Relation Network 
using Semantic Similarity, the 32nd Annual Conference 
of the Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence, p. 
1P104, 2018. 

[Sadek et al., 2016] Jawad Sadek, Farid Meziane: Extracting 
Arabic Causal Relations Using Linguistic Patterns, ACM 
Transactions on Asian and Low-Resource Language In-
formation Processing, pages 1-20, 2016. 

[Sakaji et al., 2008] Hiroki Sakaji, Satoshi Sekine, and Shi-
geru Masuyama: Extracting causal knowledge using clue 
phrases and syntactic patterns. In 7th International Con-
ference on Practical Aspects of Knowledge Management 
(PAKM), pages 111–122, 2008. 

 [Sakaji et al., 2017] Hiroki Sakaji, Risa Murono, Hiroyuki 
Sakai, Jason Bennett, and Kiyoshi Izumi: Discovery of 
rare causal knowledge from financial statement sum-
maries. In The 2017 IEEE Symposium on Computational 
Intelligence for Financial Engineering and Economics 
(CIFEr), pages 602–608, 2017. 

65


