



















































A Blissymbolics Translation System


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 32–36
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

32

A Blissymbolics Translation System

Usman Sohail
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

12015 Waterfront Dr. Playa Vista,
CA 900094, USA

msohail@usc.edu

David Traum
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

12015 Waterfront Dr. Playa Vista,
CA 900094, USA

traum@ict.usc.edu

Abstract

Blissymbolics (Bliss) is a pictographic writ-
ing system that is used by people with com-
munication disorders. Bliss attempts to create
a writing system that makes words easier to
distinguish by using pictographic symbols that
encapsulate meaning rather than sound, as the
English alphabet does for example. Users of
Bliss rely on human interpreters to use Bliss.
We created a translation system from Bliss to
natural English with the hopes of decreasing
the reliance on human interpreters by the Bliss
community. We first discuss the basic rules of
Blissymbolics. Then we point out some of the
challenges associated with developing com-
puter assisted tools for Blissymbolics. Next
we talk about our ongoing work in developing
a translation system, including current limita-
tions, and future work. We conclude with a set
of examples showing the current capabilities
of our translation system.

1 Background

An estimated 7.7% of children aged 3-17 have
had a communication disorder, 44.8% of which re-
ceive no intervention services (Black et al., 2015).
Blissymbolics was created to provide a tool for
cognitive, and speech related communication dis-
orders. Blissymbolics(Bliss, 1965), uses picto-
graphic symbols to represent language as opposed
to existing alphabetic writing systems in order to
provide an alternate that may be easier to learn for
people with low literacy.

In 1985, Muter and Johns conducted three ex-
periments to see if ideographic symbols made
it easier to extract meaning from words com-
pared to alphabetic symbols. Their experiments
showed shorter reaction times for extracting mean-
ing from symbols of Blissymbolics than for words
spelled in an unfamiliar language (Muter and
Johns, 1985). Therefore Blissymbolics may be
easier to learn for people with low literacy. In
addition, Blissymbolics can be used without any

speech, which may be useful for people with
speech related communication disorders.

Although many people use Blissymbolics, they
still have to rely on an interpreter to communicate
with the general population. In this paper, we dis-
cuss a prototype system we developed that trans-
lates Blissymbolics utterances to English. We also
discuss the future work we think is necessary for
this to become feasible for mainstream use.

Blissymbolics is composed of graphic Bliss
characters that form the smallest unit of meaning.
There are four categories of reasoning for creating
a glyph for Bliss characters illustrated in figure 1.

Pictographic Ideographic

Arbitrary Composite

Figure 1

Bliss characters can be combined to form Bliss
words with new meanings similar to the way En-
glish words can be composed of one or more let-
ters. However, individual symbols in Bliss corre-
spond to a morpheme, or smallest unit of meaning,
unlike the phonetic correspondence of written En-
glish. In figure 2, the symbol for house combined
with the symbol for medical form the word hospi-
tal, clinic.



33

Figure 2

2 Challenges of Blissymbolics

2.1 Encoding
Currently there is no agreed upon encoding for
Bliss characters, making it difficult to develop
computer assisted tools. The official Blissymbol-
ics dictionary contains a unique 4-5 digit code as-
sociated with each Bliss character or Bliss word.
This encoding scheme does not differentiate be-
tween Bliss characters and words. This is the only
encoding we were able to find.

2.2 Computer Assisted Tools
Currently, users of Blissymbolics are restricted by
the need for an interpreter. Although the inter-
net has provided many tools for Blissymbolics,
there has yet to be a satisfactory translation tool
from Blissymbolics to natural language. Most on-
line tools are focused on creating customized Bliss
charts. For example, the chart in figure 3 about
food was created using blissonline 1.

Figure 3

Bliss charts help users communicate with non-
Blissymbolics users since the symbols are anno-
tated with their translation. However, users are re-
stricted to the number of symbols that fit on one
chart and the expressiveness of Blissymbolics is
reduced. Previous work has addressed the large
number of symbols by dynamically changing the
chart as symbols are input so that only valid op-
tions are presented to the user at each step (Netzer
and Elhadad, 2006).

1www.blissonline.org

Attempts have been made to create a translation
system from Blissymbolics to natural language.
Several systems have a digital bliss chart that syn-
thesizes speech for a given bliss word that is se-
lected 2. The digital nature of such devices helps
increase the number of symbols that a user can ac-
cess. Still, users are not able to build words up
from the characters that compose them.

At the University of Dundee (Waller and Jack,
2002), a predictive translation system prototype
was built using a trigram language model. The
system took Blissymbols as input and output En-
glish sentences. The gloss of each Blissymbol
contains one or more words of the target language.
The system consulted the trigram model to find the
most probable word from a given gloss. The sys-
tem also looked for words that probably belonged
between any two words, such as articles (which
are often implied in Blissymbolics). Although the
results of the system were not good enough for
mainstream use, the study paved the way for Natu-
ral Language Processing techniques to be applied
to Blissymbolics, and highlights some shortcom-
ings that need to be addressed for our work.

First, the input to the prototype translation sys-
tem is full Bliss words, not necessarily the char-
acters that compose them. In the current official
dictionary, there are 404 unique Bliss characters,
and 4,626 unique Bliss words that are composed
of one or more characters. If the system had the
ability to build up words from the characters that
compose them, then users would only need access
to 404 unique symbols, as opposed to all symbols
(characters and words).

Second, the translation system does not allow
the creation of new words. The official dictionary
contains words that are agreed upon by Blissym-
bolics International, but does not contain all possi-
ble words, or even all conjugations of those words.
The Blissymbolics Fundamental Rules includes a
section on building new vocabulary words, ac-
knowledging that not all words will necessarily be
built the same way by all users, and that users may
want to express words that are not in the official
lexicon. The rules provide an example of a word
being built in a different way than the official dic-
tionary.

For example, in Figure 4, the official spelling of
teacher is composed of the characters for person

2www.tobiidynavox.com, www.minspeak.com



34

Figure 4

(non-gendered) + giving + knowledge. The funda-
mental rules concede that the same word should be
able to be built with the symbol female replacing
person (non-gendered). Additionally, there is no
official spelling for the word cried, although there
is a word for cry and there is a past action indica-
tor character that is made to be used as in figure 5.

Figure 5

A translation system that could handle alternate
spellings and unseen conjugations would help re-
lax the strict spelling requirements of the official
dictionary as intended by the Blissymbolics com-
munity, and increase the expressibility of the sys-
tem.

3 Our Translation System

We built a translation system in Python available
on github3. We made a few assumptions about
how Blissymbolics would be used. First, we as-
sumed that any input sequence would have a word
separating token, as the Fundamental Rules of
Blissymbolics dictate. Second, we used the en-
coding scheme found in The Official Blissymbol-
ics Dictionary, where each Bliss symbol, word or
character, is given a unique 4-5 digit numeric ID.
Our translation system only accepts these IDs as
input. We will need to create a graphical user in-
terface that allows users to select the Bliss charac-
ters to input in order to make this system usable.

The work associated with building our trans-
lation system focuses on Morphological Realiza-
tion, and a Language Model.

3.1 Morphological Realization
We wanted users to have the ability to express
words or conjugations of existing words that are

3www.github.com/usmansohail/Nighat

not in the Official Blissymbolics Dictionary. For
now, we only applied morphological realization on
recognized Bliss words, meaning only officially
recognized words can be conjugated in new ways.

We used the SimpleNLG realizer (Gatt and Re-
iter, 2009) to conjugate Bliss words. For example,
if an input Bliss character sequence had a Bliss
past tense indicator, we applied the past tense re-
alization to it. So a user could input the spelling
for the bliss word translating to cry, weep and ap-
pend the past tense indicator to the end, and get
the resulting words cried, wept.

Currently the system is limited to morpholog-
ical realization supported by SimpleNLG. There
are over 40 morphological relationships included
in Blissymbolics. Each relationship needs its own
realizing mechanism, not all of which can be
found in SimpleNLG. For example, there is a Bliss
character combine meant to combine two concepts
found in Bliss words. This is not a morpholog-
ical relationship and cannot be done using Sim-
pleNLG.

3.2 Language Model
We needed a language model to help choose the
best word from a given set of translation gloss, and
to decide when to add articles. The system first
builds all words using the machine readable dic-
tionary, and the morphological realizer outputting
a list of sets, where each set contains the possi-
ble English words that the given Bliss word may
translate to. The system looks at each set to de-
termine if it contains nouns using wordnet (Miller,
1995). If a noun is found, then a set of articles a,
the, or a blank is inserted before the set of nouns.
From here, the language model needs to decide the
most probable gloss words from each set, and also
which article, if any, is most probable.

We created an N-gram model trained on the
Gutenberg, brown, conll2000, and nps-chat cor-
pora using NLTK (Bird and Loper, 2004). We
used interpolation smoothing as in equation 1.

P (w1, w2, w3) = c1P (w3) + c2P (w3|w2) + ...
...+ CnP (w3|w1, w2)

s.t.
∑

ci = 1c1 < c2 < cn

(1)



35

4 Test Set

We created a test set composed of 15 bliss utter-
ances from children’s books (Bruna, 1978; Andy
and Mann, 1979; Chait, 1992; Cocking, 1979), 6
of which are shown in figure 6 for discussion.

5 Results

The translation system received a BLEU score
of 34.53 when evaluated on the 15 utterance test
set. Some sentences preserve the general mean-
ing, whereas others do not. Some of the errors are
related to the language model, while others are re-
lated to Blissymbolics. In Figure 6, examples 1,
and 2 have errors that are related to the language
model. Sentence 1 is missing an a. Sentence 3 is
an example of a sentence that preserves the mean-
ing, although it incorrectly translates fat to thick.
The system translates Julius from sentence 2 and
1 to a boy. This translation relies on context to be
interpreted correctly. Sentence 4 translates other
to you. This error is caused by the fact that you
and other are spelled the same way with a minor
difference. The word you is spelled with person +
2, while other is spelled with person [modified] +
2. The current encoding scheme assigns each sym-
bol with a unique ID, however modified symbols
do not have a unique ID. Therefore, person and
person [modified] both have the same ID. Figure
7 shows the difference between the two words.

Other You

Figure 7: Other vs You

6 Future Work

In order to make a usable system, we think it is
necessary to address the following topics:

1. Encoding scheme
As the examples from figure 6 show, the cur-
rent encoding scheme is not able to capture
all of the capabilities of Bliss. In order to
make a usable system, an encoding scheme
needs to be chosen that can work with com-
puter systems, and also preserves the capa-

bilities of Bliss, such as modification of sym-
bols.

2. Language model
The language model that we used was imple-
mented to show a proof of concept. In order
to make the system more applicable, we think
that the training corpora used should be com-
posed primarily of dialogue utterances, since
this is the way that the translation system is
intended to be used.

3. User Interface
If users are ever to use the system, there needs
to exist a way for them to easily input. In or-
der to build this, the encoding scheme needs
to be chosen first. A critical component of a
UI is a text to speech component so that users
can be independent of a human interpreter.

4. Context
A system that is able to exploit the context of
a dialogue would decrease the reliance on a
human interpreter. The way Bliss is used typ-
ically involves a human interpreter who can
infer context, such as the name Julius from
figure 6.

7 Conclusion

Our translation system adds some new features
to Blissymbolics translation systems, namely the
ability to create new words based on existing
words. We also address some topics that need to
be addressed for mainstream use. We believe our
morphological perspective is useful for Blissym-
bolics, however more work is necessary to assess
it’s impact on translation. We hope to work with
the Blissymbolics community for future work.

8 Acknowledgments

Special thanks to Anne O’Malley, Shirley Mc-
Naughton, Margareta Jennische, Annalu Waller,
Lovisa Jacobson, and Blissymbolics Communica-
tion International.



36

Reference Translation/Bliss Result Translation

1
for boy and his
family

2
a boy the gain much
persons

3
I have two thick fish

4
the you the fat fish is
called bottom

Figure 6: Each row contains an utterance written in Bliss annotated with it’s reference translation. Adjacent to that
is the corresponding result translation using our system. Any written English inside of the Bliss utterance is taken
as is.

References
Project gutenberg (n.d.). www.project.gutenberg.org.

Accessed: 2018-7-29.

Andy and Gwen Mann. 1979. Autumn. University of
Toronto Press.

Steven Bird and Edward Loper. 2004. Nltk: the nat-
ural language toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL
2004 on Interactive poster and demonstration ses-
sions, page 31. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Lindsey I Black, Anjel Vahratian, and Howard J Hoff-
man. 2015. Communication disorders and use of in-
tervention services among children aged 3-17 years:
United states, 2012. nchs data brief. number 205.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Charles Kasiel Bliss. 1965. Semantography (blissym-
bolics): a simple system of 100 logical pictorial
symbols, which can be operated and read like 1+ 2.

Dick Bruna. 1978. I Can Dress Myself. Methuen Pub-
lications.

Thelma Chait. 1992. Julius and his friend the com-
puter. Oxford University Press Southern Africa.

Althea Cocking. 1979. The Blissymbol Opposite Se-
ries: Book 1.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. Simplenlg: A re-
alisation engine for practical applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 90–93. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–
41.

Paul Muter and Elizabeth E Johns. 1985. Learning lo-
gographies and alphabetic codes. Human Learning,
4:105–125.

Yael Netzer and Michael Elhadad. 2006. Using se-
mantic authoring for blissymbols communication
boards. In Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference of the NAACL, Companion
Volume: Short Papers, NAACL-Short ’06, pages
105–108, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Annalu Waller and Kris Jack. 2002. A predictive blis-
symbolic to english translation system. In Proceed-
ings of the fifth international ACM conference on As-
sistive technologies, pages 186–191. ACM.

http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1614049.1614076
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1614049.1614076
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1614049.1614076

