



















































A Sociolinguistic Study of Online Echo Chambers on Twitter


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Natural Language Processing and Computational Social Science, pages 78–83
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 6, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

78

A Sociolinguistic Study of Online Echo Chambers on Twitter

Nikita Duseja ∗
Computer Science and Engineering

Texas A&M University
nduseja@tamu.edu

Harsh Jhamtani ∗
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

jharsh@cmu.edu

Abstract

Online social media platforms such as Face-
book and Twitter are increasingly facing criti-
cism for polarization of users. One particular
aspect which has caught the attention of vari-
ous critics is presence of users in echo cham-
bers - a situation wherein users are exposed
mostly to the opinions which are in sync with
their own views. In this paper, we perform a
socio-linguistic study by comparing the tweets
of users in echo chambers with the tweets of
users not in echo chambers with similar lev-
els of polarity on a broad topic. Specifically,
we carry out a comparative analysis of tweet
structure, lexical choices, and focus issues,
and provide possible explanations for the re-
sults.

1 Introduction

An echo chamber refers to a social phenomenon
in which most of the content one receives in one’s
social media feed is heavily skewed toward one’s
own opinion, often defined in context of controver-
sial political topics (Garimella et al., 2018). In so-
cial media environments, users are exposed to sev-
eral polarized views on political topics. According
to the selective exposure theory (Frey, 1986), indi-
viduals have a tendency to consume information
from like minded individuals content and avoid
contrasting perspectives. This leads to the exis-
tence of polarized segregated communities in so-
cial media, with resounding similar views. This
can be concerning as such users are not exposed to
alternate or opposing perspectives, which may ad-
versely impact deliberative democratic processes.

In this work we carry out a comparative anal-
ysis of tweets from users in echo chambers ver-
sus tweets from users not in echo chambers.
Specifically, we compare some properties pertain-
ing to tweet structure, lexical choices, and top-

∗ ND and HJ contributed equally for this paper

Figure 1: Visualizing user-followee network for a user in
echo chamber (center of left sub-figure) and another user not
in echo chamber (center of right sub-figure) on Twitter. A red
circle represents a user with positive polarity scores for the
topic Obamacare, while a blue circle represents a user with
negative polarity scores. An arrow from x to y means that
user x follows user y. A user in an echo chamber is exposed
only to views very similar to his/her own opinions while a
user not in an echo chamber witnesses opposing views as
well. We focus on analyzing differences in tweets from the
two types of users.

ics/attributes discussed in tweets. Table 1 sum-
marizes some hypotheses of interest we framed to
compare the tweets. To perform the analysis, we
identify two sets of users with similar polarity lev-
els on a topic, with one set of users being in echo
chambers, while the other control set of users are
not in echo chambers. We build on prior works
(Garimella et al., 2018) to identify such sets of
twitter users on topics such as Affordable Care Act
(Obamacare), a comprehensive health care reform
law that was enacted under the Obama administra-
tion. Figure 1 provides a pictorial overview of the
network of a user in an echo chamber and another
user not in an echo chamber.

There have been many recent works focusing on
echo chambers in online social media (Garimella
et al., 2018; Grömping, 2014; Barberá et al., 2015;
Kwon et al., 2012). Many prior works point out
presence of a large number of social media users
in echo chambers (An et al., 2014; Bakshy et al.,
2015; Lawrence et al., 2010). Our primary con-
tribution is a comparative analysis of tweets from
users in echo chambers versus users not in echo



79

chambers. We build on work of Garimella et al.
(2018), who focus on identifying users in echo
chambers and characterizing various social net-
work properties of such users. We believe our
study can help in further characterizing and under-
standing online echo chambers, which may help in
mitigating negative impacts associated with echo
chambers.

2 Dataset

We use data from Garimella et al. (2018) who
calculated polarity of twitter users towards top-
ics such as Obamacare on twitter. The dataset
contains polarities of users, as well as the user-
follower graph for the same set of users.

We choose to work with Obamacare topic for
the analysis in this paper. All the polarity scores of
users are in the range (−2.5, 2.5). A higher posi-
tive score represents more conservative viewpoint,
while a more negative score represents a more lib-
eral viewpoint (Garimella et al., 2018) (Not to be
confused with sentiment towards the topic). In
general, positive score users can be considered as
conservative users, while negative score users can
be considered as liberal users.

The dataset also consists of user-follower net-
work in Twitter for the relevant set of users. We
are mainly interested in finding the followees of
users since a user is typically exposed to tweets
and re-tweets of his/her followees in the social me-
dia feed.

2.1 Echo chambers
We consider following notation for a twitter user
u ∈ U , where U is the set of all users under con-
sideration.

• S(u) : Set of followees of u having same po-
larity as the user u

• D(u) Set of followees of u having different
polarity as the user u

To characterize an echo chamber, we define Ho-
mophily score H(u) for a user u as follows:

H(u) =
|S(u)| − |D(u)|
|S(u)|+ |D(u)|

(1)

Thus, H(u) ∈ (−1, 1) range (both inclusive).
A score of H(u) = 1 means that all the followees
of the user u have same polarity about the given
topic as u himself/herself. This characterizes an

extreme case of being in an echo chamber. On the
other hand, score close to 0 would suggest that the
user has followees of both polarity, i.e they belong
to classes on both sides of the spectrum in equal
number. We define a threshold of θ1 such that
users with H(u) above θ1 are said to be in echo
chamber EC. Users having H(u) < θ2 (θ2 < θ1)
are said to not be in an echo chamber NE. We first
report results for θ1 = 0.9, θ2 = 0.7, and later
discuss the robustness to these choices.

EC = {u : u ∈ U,H(u) ≥ θ1} (2)
NE = {u : u ∈ U,H(u) < θ2} (3)

3 Methodology

Our aim is to compare tweets from users in echo
chambers against tweets of users not in echo
chambers. Towards this end, we control for the po-
larity of the users, so that we could study any dif-
ferences in nature of tweets which correlates with
being in an echo chamber. Specifically, we restrict
users to polarity range 0.5 to 1.5. We term users
in this polarity region as moderate conservatives
(MC).

We work with moderate conservatives and com-
pare the tweets of users in echo chambers ver-
sus users not in echo chambers. Next, we fil-
ter to retain only those tweets which talk about
Obamacare (the original data contains all tweets
of users over a long time duration). This leaves
us with 47,533 tweets for moderate conservatives
in echo chambers MC-EC, and 35,820 tweets of
moderate conservatives not in echo chamber MC-
NE, talking about Obamacare.

Table 1 lists our main hypotheses which we test
on the dataset. We use chi-squared tests for test-
ing statistical significance while comparing counts
of features. The chi-squared test (Greenwood and
Nikulin, 1996) is used to determine whether a per-
ceived association between two categorical vari-
ables is by chance or reflects a real association be-
tween these two variables in the data. It compares
the observed frequency with expected frequency
(expected assuming no correlation).

We perform some pre-processing on the tweet
texts before conducting the experiments. We use
Twitter tokenizer from NLTK (Bird et al., 2009)
to tokenize the tweets. We retain the hashtags and
URLs as they are needed in the experiments and
analysis.



80

Type Hypothesis Holds indata?
Tweet-structure MC-NE tweets are more likely than MC-EC to cite external resource Yes
Tweet-structure MC-EC tweets are more likely than MC-NE to contain hashtags Yes

Vocabulary MC-NE tweets are more likely than MC-EC to express uncertainty Yes
Vocabulary MC-NE tweets are more likely than MC-EC to use swear words Yes

Topical Certain topics are talked about more in MC-EC tweets and vice versa Yes

Table 1: Summary of the hypotheses and the results. We carry out tweet structure analysis, vocabulary choice analysis, and a
topic-level analysis, and observe significant difference in the tweets from the two types of users.

4 Experiments

In this section, we describe more details about the
experiments and corresponding observations. We
define three types of hypotheses: 1) Tweet Struc-
ture Analysis 2) Vocabulary Analysis 3) Topic
Analysis.

4.1 Tweet structure analysis
Tweet structure analysis aims to uncover differ-
ences in tweets from the two types of users with re-
gard to aspects like use of hash-tags, use of accom-
panying URLs, etc. Our first hypothesis is based
on intuition that MC-EC users feel less compelled
to cite an external resource while tweeting, as all
the tweets in their feed already resonate with their
own view-points. Our second hypothesis is that
MC-EC tweets are more likely to contain hash-
tags, as MC-EC users may more strongly believe
in correctness of their own viewpoint, and may use
more hash-tags with the intention to spread their
strongly believed view-points.

4.1.1 Evidence / Link citing
Hypothesis: We hypothesize that users not in
echo chamber may be more likely to tweet or
re-tweet with citing external news link or other
sources. This follows the general idea that users
in an ‘echo chamber’ might feel less of a need
to justify their claims or opinions as people (fol-
lowees) around them echo with similar opinions.

Analysis: We perform the test using a chi-squared
test. We first identify URLs using simple regu-
lar expressions. We notice that most of the urls
were shortened URLs. We leverage python library
BeautifulSoup (Richardson, 2007) to identify the
expanded URLs, and then filter out any twitter
URLs (since these often correspond to other user’s
status’). We observe that tweets from MC-NE
users are much more likely to contain external
URLs, which are often news or opinion pieces,

compared to users in echo chambers( p < 0.01
as per chi-squared test). Specifically, about 35%
tweets from MC-NE users had an external link
while only about 19% of the tweets from MC-EC
contained an external link.

4.1.2 Use of hashtag
Hypothesis: Hashtags are widely used in tweets,
often to explicitly tag the tweet about being a
specific topic or point, and are often used with the
intention to spread messages or viewpoints. We
hypothesize that MC-EC users’ tweets are more
likely to use hashtags.

Analysis: We explore the degree to which hash-
tags are used in tweets between the two types of
users. We observe that our hypothesis holds in
the dataset - tweets and re-tweets from MC-EC
users are much more likely to contain hashtags(
p < 0.01 as per chi-squared test). Specifically,
45909 MC-EC tweets out of 47533 had at least
one hashtag, while only 17097 MC-NE tweets out
of 35820 had hashtags.

4.2 Vocabulary analysis

We inspect if being in an echo chamber is cor-
related with more/less usage of specific types of
words. For example, MC-NE users are exposed to
varying viewpoints, and therefore their vocabulary
choice might reflect some uncertainty in views.

4.2.1 Words expressing uncertainty
Hypothesis: Since users in echo chambers are
exposed only to opinions similar to theirs in the
online media, they might show more certainty in
their tweets. Similarly, users not in echo chambers
are exposed to alternative views also in online
social media, and as such may use uncertainty
expressing words more frequently. We hypoth-
esize that tweets from MC-NE users are more
likely to contain uncertainty depicting words.



81

We use following list of uncertainty depicting
words: ‘may’,‘might’,‘perhaps’, ‘maybe/may-be’,
‘possibly’, ‘likely’ .

Analysis: We test the hypothesis using chi-
squared test and observe that the usage is more
frequent in users outside of echo chambers (p <
0.01). For example, word ‘might’ appears 238
times in MC-NE tweets, while occurs only 159
times in MC-EC tweets. Word ‘may’ appears 720
times in MC-NE, while occurs only 581 times in
MC-EC.

4.2.2 Use of swear words
Hypothesis: We hypothesize that users not
in echo chambers are more likely to express
frustration through swear words on witnessing
opposing viewpoints. We use the list of common
English swear words 1. We do expand the list
to include commonly occurring variants. For
example, f**cking is a commonly used word
which would not have shown up on doing exact
token match to f**ck. This expansion was done
manually, as automatic lemmatization tools did
not work satisfactorily. Improving swear word
detection would be part of future work.

Analysis: We inspect the total count of swear
words used in the two set of tweets. We observe
that the proposed hypothesis holds in the data (p <
0.01 using a chi-squared test). For example, word
‘f**k’ appears 41 times in MC-NE tweets, while
occurs only 1 time in our set of MC-EC tweets.
This analysis suggests that being in echo chamber
is correlated with lesser use of swear words.

4.3 Topic analysis
We had filtered the tweets to be about the broad
topic of Obamacare. In this analysis, we are
interested in comparing the main (sub-)topics
about Obamacare that are discussed in the two
user groups. Towards this goal, we run a topic
model on the set of tweets from each user group.

Hypothesis: We hypothesize that certain topics
would be correlated with presence in echo cham-
ber i.e. some topics would be talked about more
in MC-EC tweets while certain other topics would
be covered more in MC-NE tweets. We believe
that presence in echo chambers might have an

1 Available at https://en.wiktionary.org/
wiki/Category:English_swear_words

effect on the aspects of Obamacare that users are
tweeting about.

Analysis: We run LDA (Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion) topic model to extract the topics for the com-
bined set of tweets from both user types. LDA is a
generative model, where each ‘document’ is sup-
posed to have been generated using a multinomial
distribution over the set of topics, and each word
in the document can be thought of being generated
from a topic picked up based on the drawn topic
distribution for that document. Each topic itself is
a multinomial distribution over the vocabulary of
words.

Towards this end, we run the topic model for K
number of topics on all the tweets i.e. tweets from
MC-NE and MC-EC combined. We limit the vo-
cabulary to 1000 most frequently occurring words
in the dataset excluding the English stop words.
The model approximates the multinomial distribu-
tion over vocabulary for each topic, and also com-
putes the relative proportion of each topic for ev-
ery document (tweet). For each of the two types of
tweets (from MC-NE and MC-EC users), we com-
pute an aggregated topic distribution for that type
by summing the topic distribution vectors of corre-
sponding tweets. This can be thought of summing
up fractional counts of occurrence of topics, and
this provides us with two topic occurrence pseudo-
counts, one for each set of tweets.

For each topic, we test if it’s pseudo count is
significantly different between the two types of
tweets. We experiment with K = 10, 15, 20, and
observe that 11 (for K = 20), 6 (for K = 10)
and 3 (for K = 5) topics had statistically sig-
nificant different occurrence in the two sets of
tweets (p < 0.01). For example, for K = 20,
topic future (‘time’,‘year’,‘watch’,‘future’) occurs
much more in MC-EC tweets while topic repeal
(‘repeal’,‘vote’,‘repeal’,‘senate’) is present much
more in MC-NE.

4.4 Sensitivity to homophily threshold
parameters θ1 and θ2

Above experiments were reported for homophily
thresholds θ1 = 0.9, θ2 = 0.7. These values
were selected such that users with very high ho-
mophily scores are marked as being in echo cham-
bers. We repeat the all the experiments with more
sets of parameter values (θ1 = 0.8, θ2 = 0.8)
and (θ1 = 0.9, θ2 = 0.9), and observe very sim-

https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:English_swear_words
https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:English_swear_words


82

ilar results, with all the tested hypotheses leading
to same conclusions. This demonstrates that the
analysis is robust to changes in these parameter
values.

5 Discussions

Since we were interested in comparing the linguis-
tic properties of the tweets from two types of users,
we control for polarity levels, and select MC-EC
and MC-NE sets of users. It is possible to extend
the work on other such pairs of categories, such
as ML-EC and ML-NE (ML: moderate liberals),
and test the generality of the proposed hypothe-
ses to other such groups. Moreover, we experi-
ment with tweets on only one topic: Obamacare -
it would be interesting to test the generalizability
of the hypotheses to other data sets as well. Such
extensions to the current work are part of future
directions.

There are certain limitations of the current
analysis. We did not take into account many
network and content popularity effects. Moreover,
we do not comment on any causality aspect:
for example, does one’s presence in an echo
chamber makes one’s tweet less likely to contain
uncertainty depicting words, or if less polarized
users are less likely to get trapped in an echo
chamber. This remains an important possible
future extension.

Related Work Garimella et al. (2018) propose
methods to identify partisan and bipartisan users,
and characterize such users based on network ef-
fect, profile information, and interaction actions
such as retweets. We leverage their work and
dataset to define echo chambers. However, our
main focus is to do a linguistic comparison of
tweets based on whether the tweet is from a user
in an echo chamber or not.

Many prior works (Garimella et al., 2018) aim
to study echo chambers in context of various net-
work effects. Some prior works correlate retweet
network with political ideology of the users (Bar-
berá et al., 2015). Bakshy et al. (2015) study the
consumption of online content generated by users
of opposing views. Gilbert et al. (2009) conduct
a comment based study on political blogs and find
that, to a great extent, comments are in agreement
with the views of the author of the blog. We on the
other hand correlate some linguistic properties of
tweets with presence in an online echo chamber.

6 Conclusion

We have carried out a comparison of tweets be-
tween moderate conservatives in echo chambers
with moderate conservatives not in echo cham-
bers, on the topic Obamacare. We carry out anal-
ysis at three different levels: tweet-structure level,
topic level, and word-group level. We observe
statistically significant difference in frequency of
usage of uncertainty depicting words, hashtags,
swear words, and external URL links, as well as
a difference in the aspects of Obamacare talked
about frequently between the two types of tweets.
We also highlight possible future extensions to our
work.

Acknowledgements

We are thankful to David R. Mortensen for insight-
ful comments and discussions. We also acknowl-
edge Lori Levin, Vidhisha Balachandran, Sanket
V. Mehta, Kundan Krishna, and anonymous work-
shop reviewers for providing valuable feedback.
We are thankful to Kiran Garimella for sharing
dataset with us.

References
Jisun An, Daniele Quercia, Meeyoung Cha, Krishna

Gummadi, and Jon Crowcroft. 2014. Sharing po-
litical news: the balancing act of intimacy and so-
cialization in selective exposure. EPJ Data Science,
3(1):12.

Eytan Bakshy, Solomon Messing, and Lada A Adamic.
2015. Exposure to ideologically diverse news and
opinion on facebook. Science, 348(6239):1130–
1132.

Pablo Barberá, John T Jost, Jonathan Nagler, Joshua A
Tucker, and Richard Bonneau. 2015. Tweeting from
left to right: Is online political communication more
than an echo chamber? Psychological science,
26(10):1531–1542.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009.
Natural language processing with Python: analyz-
ing text with the natural language toolkit. ” O’Reilly
Media, Inc.”.

Dieter Frey. 1986. Recent research on selective expo-
sure to information. In Advances in experimental
social psychology, volume 19, pages 41–80. Else-
vier.

Kiran Garimella, Gianmarco De Francisci Morales,
Aristides Gionis, and Michael Mathioudakis. 2018.
Political discourse on social media: Echo chambers,
gatekeepers, and the price of bipartisanship. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference



83

on World Wide Web, pages 913–922. International
World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Eric Gilbert, Tony Bergstrom, and Karrie Karahalios.
2009. Blogs are echo chambers: Blogs are echo
chambers. In 2009 42nd Hawaii International Con-
ference on System Sciences, pages 1–10. IEEE.

Priscilla E Greenwood and Michael S Nikulin. 1996.
A guide to chi-squared testing, volume 280. John
Wiley & Sons.

Max Grömping. 2014. echo chambers partisan face-
book groups during the 2014 thai election. Asia Pa-
cific Media Educator, 24(1):39–59.

K Hazel Kwon, Onook Oh, Manish Agrawal, and
H Raghav Rao. 2012. Audience gatekeeping in the
twitter service: An investigation of tweets about the
2009 gaza conflict. AIS Transactions on Human-
Computer Interaction, 4(4):212–229.

Eric Lawrence, John Sides, and Henry Farrell. 2010.
Self-segregation or deliberation? blog readership,
participation, and polarization in american politics.
Perspectives on Politics, 8(1):141–157.

Leonard Richardson. 2007. Beautiful soup documen-
tation. April.


