




































Automatization of subprocesses in subtitling 

Anke Tardel 
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz and 

TRA&CO Center Germersheim 

antardel@uni-mainz.de 

Silvia Hansen-Schirra 
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz and 

TRA&CO Center Germersheim 

hansenss@uni-mainz.de 

Silke Gutermuth 
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz and 

TRA&CO Center Germersheim 

gutermsi@uni-mainz.de 

Moritz Schaeffer 
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz and 

TRA&CO Center Germersheim 

mschae01@uni-mainz.de 

 

 Abstract 

There has been noticeable growth in the 

use of intralingual and interlingual subti-

tling due to technological advances and 

accessibility legislation. The process of 

subtitling, however, has yet to be thor-

oughly investigated with empirical meth-

ods. Given that subtitling is a complex 

task, interpreting keylogging and eye-

tracking data in the overall process can be 

complicated. We therefore focus on the 

subprocesses involved in subtitling, i.e. 

transcription and translation of movie dia-

logue. With advancements in neural ma-

chine translation (NMT) especially with 

creative texts (Toral et al. 2018), research 

in this special field of translation becomes 

even more essential to find meaningful 

ways of improving subtitling processes 

and informing subtitling training. This de-

velopment is focus of CompAsS (Com-

puter-Assisted Subtitling), a project 

funded by the EU and managed by ZDF 

Digital and University of Mainz with the 

aim to improve current subtitling pro-

cesses. 

Within CompAsS an exploratory study 

was carried out where the transcription 

and translation processes of 13 profes-

sional subtitlers and 13 translation stu-

dents were recorded. Participants per-

formed eight intralingual and interlingual 

transcription tasks. Here we focus on the 

                                                 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. 

results of the three post-editing tasks from 

Swedish via English (pivot language) into 

German. Participants post-edited three au-

tomatically translated German transcripts 

of three two-minute video snippets of a 

Swedish crime series. The Swedish tran-

scripts were first machine translated from 

Swedish into English and after post-edit-

ing further machine translated into Ger-

man. Participants had to post-edit under 

three different conditions: a) with access 

to the Swedish video and the post-edited 

English transcript, b) only with access to 

the Swedish video and c) without access 

to the video and only with the English 

transcript. For the NMT Google Translate 

was used. Participants had a translation 

brief to produce high quality transcripts of 

the dialogue in the videos; there was no 

time limit and participants were able to re-

search online.  

The tasks were recorded in Translog-II 

(Carl 2012) with a plugin for eyetracking 

which allows for a fine-grained analysis of 

activities such as revisions, and source and 

target text reading. In combination with 

screen recording and eyetracking it is pos-

sible to observe when and where partici-

pants look in the video or text, while pro-

ducing the transcripts. Triangulating the 

data with questionnaire ratings, we ob-

serve the impact of access to the video and 

English relay transcript during post-edit-

ing of NMT regarding attention 

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 19



distribution, technical and temporal effort. 

The results in terms of time and quality 

guide the conception of a new subtitling 

tool. For the analysis of effort, we use es-

tablished measures based on gaze and typ-

ing data, and subjective ratings (de Sousa, 

Aziz & Specia, 2011; Vieira, 2016). Our 

hypotheses were that post-editing is faster 

than translation tasks from scratch and 

that access to the video is essential for the 

post-editing task even if the source lan-

guage is unknown. The results will be pre-

sented with statistical analyses per partic-

ipant group and condition and combined 

in linear mixed-effects models. 

References 

Carl, M., 2012. Translog-II: a Program for Recording 

User Activity Data for Empirical Translation Pro-

cess Research. Proceedings of the LREC 2012. The 

8th International Conference on Language Re-

sources and Evaluation; Istanbul, Turkey: 153–162. 

de Sousa, S., Aziz, W. & Specia, L. (2011). ‘Assessing 

the Post-Editing Effort for Automatic and Semi-Au-

tomatic Translations of DVD Subtitles’, in Proceed-

ings of the International Conference Recent Ad-

vances in Natural Language Processing 2011, 

Hissar, Bulgaria: 97–103. 

Toral, A., Wieling, M., Way, A., 2018. Post-editing Ef-

fort of a Novel With Statistical and Neural Machine 

Translation. Frontiers in Digital Humanities 5. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fdigh.2018.00009 

Vieira, L. N. (2016). ‘How do measures of cognitive 

effort relate to each other? A multivariate analysis of 

post-editing process data’, Machine Translation, 

30(1–2), pp. 41–62. 

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 20


