



















































A Framework for Annotating `Related Works' to Support Feedback to Novice Writers


Proceedings of the 13th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 90–99
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

90

A Framework for Annotating ‘Related Works’ to Support Feedback to
Novice Writers

Arlene Casey
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK

a.j.casey@sms.ed.ac.uk

Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK

bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk

Dorota Głowacka
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland

glowacka@cs.helsinki.fi

Abstract

Understanding what is expected of academic
writing can be difficult for novice writers to
assimilate, and recent years have seen several
automated tools become available to support
academic writing. Our work presents a frame-
work for annotating features of the Related
Work section of academic writing, that sup-
ports writer feedback.

1 Introduction

Learning the skill of academic writing is critical
for post-graduate students to be successful, yet
many struggle to master the standard of quality ex-
pected of them (Aitchison et al., 2012; Paltridge
and Starfield, 2007). Beyond the surface charac-
teristics of grammar and spelling, students must
grasp aspects of style and content structure ex-
pected within their discipline. Automated recog-
nition of content features in academic writing has
become a popular approach to assist students in re-
cent years. Previous work has focused on identify-
ing rhetoric intentions, such as those described by
Swales (1981) that can be found in an Introduction
(Cotos and Pendar, 2016; Anthony and V. Lashkia,
2003) or in PhD summaries (Feltrim et al., 2006).
Other approaches have focused on identifying ar-
gument components and relations and how these
relate to essay scores (Ghosh et al., 2016). The
one aspect that these approaches have in com-
mon is the need for annotated data based on task-
orientated annotation schemes. Our focus is on
building an annotation schema which can help
writers recognise appropriate intentions in writ-
ing their Related Work section, and indicate when
these are missing.

Annotating intention in academic writing is
challenging as the language and author intentions
differ across the typical sections found in a paper

(Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion) and
within disciplines (Hyland, 2015). We focus on
one section of scientific text that has, for the most
part, been ignored in the past — the Related Work
section.

Currently no annotation schema specifically fo-
cuses on Related Work. There are schemas that
capture some, but not all, elements of intentions
we seek, such as those that consider citation func-
tion (Teufel et al., 2006a; Angrosh et al., 2012)
or argument zones reflecting rhetoric intentions
(Teufel, 1999; Teufel et al., 2009). However, these
are designed for different purposes, such as under-
standing citation relations, summarisation or in-
formation extraction (e.g gene relations, knowl-
edge claims). Thus, they also have labels that
are irrelevant to Related Work, e.g. ‘Conclusion’,
which may make the annotation task more diffi-
cult. Since previous work has shown that annota-
tion schemes benefit from being designed for their
specific goal (Guo et al., 2010), we propose a spe-
cific annotation framework to support automated
writing feedback on Related Work.

This paper describes our framework for anno-
tating the discourse of Related Work in such a way
that it supports feedback on writing. The frame-
work reflects qualities that both theory and ex-
periments have shown to be important. We dis-
cuss how these qualities have motivated our de-
sign along with those existing schemes that are
most closely related to ours. We report results that
show reliable annotation for this framework. Fu-
ture work will investigate the degree to which such
annotation can be automated.

2 Background

Our aim is to help authors recognise rhetorical in-
tentions that are present in their writing and high-
light those that are missing, using these intentions



91

to form our feedback to writers. Argument struc-
tures are key in allowing an author to convey and
provide a persuasive message, which forms the
author intention. Swales (1981) was one of the
first to recognise author intentions, calling them
rhetorical moves, a strategy employed by a writer
to strengthen the persuasive appeal or stage of an
argument. This section discusses work on devel-
oping annotation schemes related to identifying
rhetoric intentions in scientific publications and
writing analytic tools. We highlight some of the
challenges others have found when working with
intentions in scientific publications and how this
relates to our goal of writing feedback. Section 3
provides more detail how schemas directly map to
our annotation design. Subsequent sections de-
scribe the dataset we have used (Section 4), the
annotation process and results (Sections 5–6), and
our plans to develop the work further (Section 7).

2.1 Understanding Author Intent in Scientific
Discourse

Argument Zoning (AZ) (Teufel, 1999) was one of
the first author intention schemas to provide re-
liability studies of their annotations and to fully
automate these. AZ marks zones that identify
knowledge claims indicating who these knowl-
edge claims belong to, in addition to providing
categories for relationships between the authors
or existing works. Teufel et al. (2009) extended
the AZ schema from 7 to 15 categories. This
extension allowed the authors to then apply their
schema to the domain of life sciences in addi-
tion to their original domain of Computational
Linguistics. The AZ scheme has also been suc-
cessfully adapted in other domains, e.g. biology
(Mizuta and Collier, 2004). The requirement to
adapt the schema to new domains supports the idea
that different styles of writing across domains may
influence recognising intention in writing and our
choice to focus on only one domain.

Whilst the AZ scheme has proven very suc-
cessful, it has been applied to capturing intentions
across entire documents. The schema was de-
signed to support tasks of summarisation and to
improve information access. For a section such
as Related Work, which is rarely used in sum-
marisation or information access, this means that
its meaningful author intentions may be labelled
too generically to be useful or not at all. Nev-
ertheless, AZ has been shown to be successful

for feedback on abstracts and summaries of PhD’s
(Feltrim et al., 2006). As one of the intended goals
of the AZ schema is summarisation, it is not sur-
prising that the schema works well for this type of
writing feedback.

Understanding the motivation or function of a
citation can help determine an author’s intention
(Teufel et al., 2006a). Work is not meant to
be cited simply because it is on the same topic
as the citing work. Rather, cited works should
be ones that have implications for the author’s
study (Maxwell, 2006). The development of ci-
tation schemas, with corresponding annotations,
has been a subject of research for several decades
(Weinstock, 1971; Oppenheim and Renn, 1978;
Teufel et al., 2006a; Angrosh et al., 2012). How-
ever, many of the early citation studies are based
on small samples, and do not include reliability
studies as annotation is done by the author only.
Such weak annotation methodology could lead to
unforeseen difficulties when it comes to practi-
cal implementation of these schemas. There is
agreement that determining the relationship of the
cited work to that of the author(s) can be difficult,
and that this subjective nature makes it hard to
operationalise (Teufel, 1999; Swales, 1990). Of-
ten context is linguistically unmarked, which can
make judgements about the relationship of the
cited work more difficult to make (Teufel, 1999).
We believe that novice writers struggle to provide
citations that go beyond lists or brief description,
and this leads to what Teufel calls “linguistically
unmarked context”. We also believe the reader’s
experience has a role to play in interpretation, with
experts in the field not requiring as many linguistic
clues to relevance as a novice reader may require.

Our work differs from most other citation
frameworks in that determining whether the au-
thor made the citation relevant in context to their
own work is more important than the recognition
of the citation function. For example, highlight-
ing that there is a gap in a cited work is not our
primary focus. We want to capture that a gap is
highlighted but also further ensure it is made rele-
vant to the authors’ own work e.g. they state what
they do that is different to fill the gap. Identify-
ing neutral or linguistically unmarked citations is
important as they indicate an opportunity for feed-
back that the writing may need revision to clarify
relevance.

Some work specifically looks at developing



92

annotation frameworks which are more directly
linked to the Toulmin model of argumentation
(Toulmin, 2003) to represent argument structures
in a research article. These annotation schemas
represent arguments as claims and premises with
some including relations of support and attack
(Stab and Gurevych, 2014). Whilst this structure
has been shown to work well in a persuasive essay
scenario, it would not support the types of inten-
tions discussed in the next section that are relevant
to Related Work.

2.2 Writing Analytics Tools

Using rhetoric intentions to provide writers with
feedback has been successful in academic writing.
Mover (Anthony and V. Lashkia, 2003), Research
Writer Tutor (RWT) (Cotos and Pendar, 2016) and
ACAWriter (Abel, 2018) are three tools based on
Swales CARS model (Swales, 1990). The first two
tools carry out annotation based on their interpre-
tation of the CARS model — the first on the Ab-
stract and the second on the Introduction. Unfor-
tunately, little information is provided on the an-
notation process. There are indications that the
RWT is intended to be used as a University tool,
so perhaps propriety concerns are behind restrict-
ing the availability of information or annotated
datasets. However, as the CARS model is de-
signed for the Introduction, this makes it likely any
schemas would be only partially relevant to iden-
tifying content expected in Related Work.

Whilst previous works motivate our approach,
no other work provides a match for the fine-
grained author intentions that allow informative
writing feedback for Related Work. It is known
that annotation schemas benefit from being task-
orientated (Guo et al., 2010). Hence, we see a
need to develop an annotation schema for recog-
nising author intentions in Related Work sections
that meet the goal of writer feedback.

3 Annotation Schema for Related Work

Domain Disciplines differ in their writing conven-
tions for academic papers. As a result, linguistic
constructs and content can differ across disciplines
(Hyland, 2015). Not all disciplines have a specific
Related Work section – some include literature
material in the Introduction or disperse it through-
out other sections. Due to these challenges, we
focus on the discipline of Computational Linguis-
tics, where Related Work sections are more readily

found.
Annotation unit We have chosen the sentence as
our unit of annotation. Many other works men-
tioned in the background section, such as those
based on AZ, use sentence as an annotation unit.
We acknowledge that using a sentence could intro-
duce challenges – for example, a given sentence
could potentially serve two functions that may be
better captured at clause level. For our purposes
of providing feedback, we believe the sentence as
an annotation unit will be the most meaningful.
One reason for this is that in the next stage of our
work (providing feedback), we will need to look at
several sentences together to determine relevance,
as citation relevance has been shown to require to
look beyond just the citing sentence (Teufel et al.,
2006a).

3.1 The Annotation Schema

We first consider what qualities should be present
in the Related Work section of a paper in Compu-
tational Linguistics and then we discuss how we
map these into our annotation schema.
Identifying Qualities in a Related Work Section
We base our Related Work qualities on key tasks
that Kamler and Thomson (2006, p. 28) indicate a
survey of related work should accomplish.

• Background This information has an impor-
tant goal of helping the author to locate their
work in the field, showing they understand
their field and its history through indicating
seminal works and other relevant research
fields. They may provide some evidence
through citation to what they are saying.

• Cited Works From more generally identi-
fying the field, the author should demon-
strate specifically (i) which works, methods
or ideas are most pertinent to their work; (ii)
how these works have influenced and moti-
vated what they do; and (iii) if and how the
current work builds on or uses these methods.

• Gap In addition to demonstrating what works
are most pertinent to their work, the author
should also make clear what the gap is, what
areas or applications have not yet been ad-
dressed in existing work. This can be done
when citing specific work or it could be in-
dicated as a gap in the field when discussing
background.



93

Literature Quality Sentence Label Description
Background BG-DESC-NE Description of the state of the field, describing/listing known methods or

common knowledge. No evidence i.e. citation is not included
BG-DESC-EP Description of the state of the field, describing/listing known methods or

common knowledge. Evidence provided i.e.citation included
BG-EVAL-P Author highlights a positive aspect in the field

Cited Work CW-DESC Describes cited work, this could be specific details, or very high level details or
nothing more than a reference for further information

CW-COMP Cited work compared to another cited work
CW-EVAL-P Positive aspect highlighted of cited work
A-CW-BUILD Author’s work uses/builds on (adapts/modifies) cited work
A-CW-SIM Author’s work is similar to cited work

Gap CW-EVAL-SC Shortcoming, problem or gap about the cited work is highlighted
BG-EVAL-SC Author highlights a shortcoming, problem or gap in the field

Author Contribution A-DIFF Author states their work is different with no detail
A-DESC Author describes their work with no linguistic marking to other’s work or

being different
A-GAP Author specifically says they address a gap or highlights the novelty of their

work
A-CW-DIFF Author’s highlights how their work is different to cited work

Additional Labels OTHER Sentence does not fit under any other label
OCR Sentence has OCR problems and annotator cannot understand
TEXT Sentence provides information about what will be discussed in the next section

Table 1: Annotation Labels

• Contribution Having exposed a gap, the au-
thor should indicate their contribution to ad-
dress this gap and highlight what makes their
work different or novel.

3.2 Mapping Qualities to the Annotation
Schema

Looking just at label names, it can seem like our
labels (Table 1) are direct replications of other
schemas. However, on closer inspection of how
authors’ apply these labels, we often find discrep-
ancies that would not work for our purpose. Table
2 provides a discussion of comparisons and simi-
larities of our label schema to those that are most
closely related (Fisas et al., 2015, 2016; Teufel,
1999; Teufel et al., 2006b; Angrosh et al., 2012;
Teufel et al., 2009). One contributing factor as to
why existing labels do not adequately support our
goals is that they are designed to look across the
whole of a document. As a result, they seek either
very general or much finer grained labelling than
we require. For example, Fisas et al. (2016) distin-
guishes between an author using methods, using
data or using tools from another cited work. This
finer grained approach is not relevant or needed to
provide feedback in a Related Work section, we
only need to know that the author used the cited
work.

3.3 Qualities and their corresponding labels

Background These types of sentences describe
the state of the field, common knowledge, or de-
scribe/list known methods. We ask our annota-
tors to identify two types of background sentences
— (i) with citations i.e. evidence provided – BG-
DESC-EP and these citations are not part of the
syntax of the sentence. (ii) Background sentences
without evidence i.e. no citations – BG-DESC-
NE. Part of the reason for this distinction is that
novice writers make a limited use of citation types
(Thompson and Tribble, 2001). We also include
a background label that relates to when an author
says something positive or highlights a strength in
the field/general – BG-EVAL-P.

Cited Works To provide informative feedback, we
need to establish the relevance of a cited work to
the author’s work or if this cited work is perfunc-
tory in nature. Firstly, we provide a label that
accounts for description of a cited work – CW-
DESC. Our other labels account for contrasting
the author’s work to cited work saying: (i) it is
similar – A-CW-SIM; (ii) the author uses/builds
on or adapts/modifies the cited work – A-CW-
BUILD. Teufel et al. (2006b) describes a category
CoCoXY that contrasts two pieces of cited work,
and highlights that this is often not annotated in
the literature as most works put comparisons to
author’s work and a cited work together. This dis-



94

Quality/Our Labels Related Works Comparison
Background
BG-DESC-NE
BG-DESC-EP

(Teufel, 1999)
(Liakata et al.,
2012) (Angrosh
et al., 2012) (Fisas
et al., 2015)

All the related works use a label of ‘Background‘ but they do not distinguish
between those that have citation evidence or not. There are some discrepancies
in what these capture to ours for e.g in Angrosh this is used for sentences that
provide background or introduction. Fisas in addition to sentences that state
common ground includes sentences of previous related work in their
background category. The reason for their more general approach could be
attributed to these other works capturing labels across the whole article.

BG-EVAL-P - We did not find evidence of other works looking for strengths in background
sentences.

Cited Works
CW-DESC (Teufel et al.,

2006b) (Angrosh
et al., 2012) (Fisas
et al., 2016)

Teufel and Fisas have a category ‘Neutral‘ which is directly related to our
category of CW-DESC. These are used like our label for descriptions of a cited
work. Fisas differs slightly in that they also include in this category references
for more information or comments on common practices which we would put
in one of our ‘Background’ sentence labels. Teufel also allows this label to be
used for an unlisted citation function or not enough evidence to put in any other
category. In our case these would go into the OTHER label. Angrosh provides
two labels ‘RWD CS’ – a sentence describing a citation occurring in that
sentence, ‘RWD’ – a sentences describing a related work where the citation
does not occur in that sentence. Our one label covers both Angrosh’s labels.

A-CW-SIM (Teufel et al.,
2006b) (Fisas et al.,
2016)

Both Fisas with a label of ‘Comparison-similarity’ and Teufel with a label of
‘PSim’ have categories that label sentences with authors work is similar to the
cited work.

A-CW-BUILD (Teufel et al.,
2006b) (Fisas et al.,
2016)

Fisas and Tuefel have labels which align with our category of A-CW-BUILD.
However, they break this into finer detail than we feel is necessary for our goal.
Fisas has four labels for using another cited work: ‘Use-method, ‘Use-Data’,
‘Use-Tool’, ‘Use-other’ and three labels for authors work based on a cited
work, ‘Basis-previous own work’, ‘Basis Others work’, ‘Basis -future work’.
Teufel has three labels: ‘PBas’, uses cited work as basis, ‘PUse’, author uses
tools/algorithms/data/definition, ‘PModi’, author adapts or modifies
tools/algorithms/data. This finer grained approach supports the goal of these
authors as they look across a whole document but is not necessary for our goal
of writer feedback.

CW-COMP (Teufel et al.,
2006b)

Teufel includes a category CoCoXY which contrasts two pieces of cited work
as our sentence label does.

CW-EVAL-P (Angrosh et al.,
2012) (Fisas et al.,
2016)

Angrosh has two labels that represent what we capture here RWS CS and
RWS. The first of these labels mentions a positive (strength) in a citation
sentence and in the second a positive (strength) is mentioned but the citation is
not present in that sentence. Fisas also has this label ‘CRITICISM-Strength’.

Gap
CW-EVAL-SC (Fisas et al.,

2016)(Teufel et al.,
2006b) (Angrosh
et al., 2012)

Our evaluation category for cited works relates directly to Tuefel’s category of
‘Weak’ - weakness of cited approach and Fisas’s ‘Criticism-weakness’.
Angrosh labels this as ‘RWSC’ - sentence noting the shortcomings in the
related work citation.

BG-EVAL-SC (Teufel et al., 2009) Tuefel’s work is the only evidence of where we can find a similarity to our
label of a shortcoming in the field although her label ‘GAP WEAK’ - lack of
solution in field, problem with other solutions covers a shortcoming in both the
field and a cited work.

Contribution
A-GAP (Fisas et al.,

2016)(Teufel et al.,
2009)

This has similarities to Fisas’s ‘Novelties’, although their label is not exclusive
to the author’s approach and could include other cited work. Teufel’s category
of ‘NOV-ADV’ is for sentences claiming a novelty or advantage of the author’s
own approach

A-CW-DIFF (Fisas et al., 2016) Our category of author and cited work comparison, A-CW-D, directly relates
to the category of Fisas of ‘Comparison-difference’.

A-DESC (Teufel et al., 2009) We could not find a schema that labels sentences just as author description.
Other works such as Tuefel have several labels which in part fall under this
category such as :‘OWN MTHD, OWN FAIL,OWN RES,OWN CONC,
AIM’. These are very specific and likely not to occur very often in a Related
Work.

TXT (Teufel, 1999) In her original AZ schema Teufel includes a label of TEXT that is the same as
our label.

Table 2: Label Schema Comparison



95

tinction of comparing two works rather than the
author’s work and a cited work is important for
recognising how an author makes citations rele-
vant. Therefore, we incorporate this category into
our schema as – CW-COMP. Additionally, we in-
clude a label for an author highlighting a positive
or strength of a cited work – C-EVAL-P.

Gap Locating a gap in academic writing often
takes the approach of highlighting weaknesses or
areas not addressed in others’ work or in the field
in general. We also want to identify when a gap or
shortcoming is highlighted in the field in general.
We add two categories: (i) BG-EVAL-SC for a
background sentence highlighting a gap/weakness
in the field; (ii) CW-EVAL-SC, where an author
highlights a shortcoming, problem or gap about a
specific cited work.

Author Contribution Here, we want to capture if
the author specifically identifies how they will ad-
dress a gap. This is done by authors when they
specifically say their work is novel, new or de-
scribe how they address a gap with the label –
A-GAP. Our label A-CW-DIFF applies when an
author compares their work directly with a cited
work, saying it is different and how it is differ-
ent. We also capture where an author describes
their own work – A-DESC. This type of descrip-
tion may not linguistically identify that the author
has made a contribution but the explanation may
describe this novelty or difference to others’ work.
Here, it could be expected that a reader’s experi-
ence may allow them to interpret this as a contri-
bution but we instruct our annotators only to mark
it as contribution if it is linguistically marked. The
identification of this type of sentence is less com-
mon in other schemas.

3.4 Learning from Pilot Annotations

Initially, a preliminary annotation study was con-
ducted that highlighted a problem when consider-
ing author differences. There were many occur-
rences of an author sentence which just indicated
“our work is different”, giving no details why or
how. The annotators pointed out that these were
not very informative sentences and quite different
to when the author actually provides details of why
their work is different. The extra label, A-DIFF,
was added to account for this.

In addition, there were some sentences which
had OCR problems, so a category was created for
this, along with a category for TEXT. TEXT in-

dicates where an author says ”In the next section
we will discuss”. This type of category was in the
original AZ schema, but we thought it unlikely to
arise in a Related Work section. However, it was
highlighted in the pilot annotations. A category of
OTHER was also added as there were some sen-
tences the annotators could not assign to a label.

4 Dataset

Initial experiments were carried out on a pre-
annotated dataset (Schäfer et al., 2012) consisting
of 266 published scientific papers from the ACL
anthology (Bird et al., 2008). The dataset was ex-
tracted from PDF by commercial OCR software,
sentence-tokenised and then manually annotated,
using MMAX2 (Müller and Strube, 2006). Pa-
pers were annotated for co-reference to cited pa-
pers and to the authors’ own work. All the papers
were 6 to 8 pages long. This is important, as short-
conference papers (4 pages) would have consider-
ably shorter Related Work sections. Initially, we
processed the full data set, and then only those pa-
pers with Related Work sections were extracted.
This resulted in a data set of 113 papers. Our final
dataset comprised of the 95 Related Work sections
that remained after we removed papers with OCR
problems.

Authors do not always signal the relevance of
a paper in its citing sentence: often it will come
in the next or subsequent sentence. Although we
are only assigning a label to a sentence, in future
work it will be necessary to look at all sentences
related to a citation to determine what feedback to
give. This was our reason for choosing a dataset
that was already marked for co-references to cita-
tions.

5 Annotation Process

5.1 Annotators

Both our annotators were PhD students in Com-
putational Linguistics, in the final stages of their
degree programs. Because knowledge possessed
by researchers in a field can (in some instances)
be used to overcome a lack of explicit linguistic
marking, PhD students were preferable over do-
main experts in terms of bringing some, but not a
lot of, knowledge to the task. This fact was ac-
knowledged by Teufel et al. (2009) who instruct
their annotators to only use rhetorical linguistic
knowledge but point out how difficult it is for do-



96

main experts not to use their knowledge when an-
notating.

One annotator annotated the whole corpus and
the other just over half the corpus (i.e., 53 Related
Work sections).

5.2 Annotator Task

The Related Work sections were given to each an-
notator in an Excel file. Each row represented a
sentence, with fields corresponding to document
id, sentence id, the original sentence, and the sen-
tence with citation and co-references marked. In
the following field, the annotator entered a label
from the pre-populated list provided. The final
field was for comments, or for indicating any an-
notations they were not sure about.

5.3 Annotator Support

The annotators were given 9 pages of guidelines
which contained examples and suggested work-
flow to decide on an annotation label. Initially,
the annotators met to discuss the guidelines and
ensure their understanding. They trained on the
same 10 Related Work sections and compared their
results discussing any difference.

6 Annotation Results

6.1 Corpus Analysis

The annotated corpus includes 95 Related Works
sections and a total of 1,806 sentences. Double an-
notation was done for 53 Related Works and 955
sentences. The size of our dataset is comparable
to others who have studied scientific publications
in annotation. Fisas et al. (2015) studied a corpus
of 40 documents, Teufel et al. (2009) studied 90
papers, Feltrim et al. (2006) 52 abstracts, and An-
thony and V. Lashkia (2003) 100 abstracts.

Our results focus on the part of the corpus that
double annotation was completed on to show the
inter-annotator agreement and highlight the chal-
lenges.

6.2 Measuring Inter Annotator Agreement

We use Cohen’s k (Cohen, 1960) to measure our
annotator agreement, correcting for chance agree-
ment. The formula is:

K =
Po − Pe
1− Pe

, (1)

where Po is observed and Pe is expected agree-
ment. The range of Kappa can be between -1 and

CW-DIFF DESC DIFF GAP
CW-DIFF 69 8 5 7
DESC 1 44 0 1
DIFF - - 2 -
GAP 5 6 2 23

Table 3: Author Label Agreement Matrix. The letter A
(Author) at the beginning of each entry was omitted for
the sake of clarity.

1, where 0 means agreement is only expected by
chance. A value of 0.8 is considered good agree-
ment.

Kappa measures are widely used in annotation
agreement in scientific publications in schemes
that have been successful in automated classifica-
tion based on their annotations (Teufel et al., 2009;
Liakata et al., 2012; Fisas et al., 2016). In gen-
eral, work on author intentions that uses Kappa
agreement reports agreement in a range of 0.65-
0.78 (Teufel et al., 2006a; Fisas et al., 2015; Teufel
et al., 2009) with Liakata et al. (2012) being much
lower at 0.55.

Teufel et al. (2009) points out that Kappa treats
agreement in rare categories as surprising and re-
wards these more than frequent categories. Al-
though she sees this as an advantage because sci-
entific publications often have these rare cate-
gories, others see this as misleading and criticise
that chance-corrected measures do this when ap-
plied to unbalanced data-sets. Hence, others of-
ten report raw agreement (Kirschner et al., 2015).
Our data does have rare categories and so we re-
port the raw agreement in addition to the Kappa
agreement.

6.2.1 Inter-annotator Agreement

The inter-annotator agreement (IAA) was 0.77 (N
= 955, n = 53, K = 2). Raw agreement was 80.1%.
These results demonstrate good agreement and are
comparable to similar studies mentioned earlier.

Out of the 955 sentences doubly annotated, the
annotators agreed on 764. Based on the agreed
sentences, the most frequent category was CW-
DESC (32.5%), followed by the background cate-
gories BG-DESC-EP (12.2%) and BG-DESC-EP
(10.9%). Following this were the author cate-
gories A-CW-DIFF (9%), A-CW-SIM (8.8%), A-
DESC (5.8%) and A-GAP (3%). In the next sec-
tion, we discuss some of the difficulties the anno-
tators had with A-COMP-DIFF versus A-GAP/A-
DESC. CW-EVAL-SC was surprisingly infrequent



97

BG-DESC-EP BG-DESC-NE CW-DESC

BG-DESC-EP 83 10 16
BG-DESC-NE 2 93 6
CW-DESC 6 5 248

Table 4: Cited Work and Background Label Agreement
Matrix

at 3.9% and CW-COMP at 2.23%. OCR and
OTHER were both at 1.3%. All the remaining
categories constituted less then 1% of sentences
and interestingly all of these had good agreement.
OCR will not occur in our writing feedback as we
will not be processing text from PDF. However,
OTHER or TEXT could happen, although these
were rare categories with TEXT having 13 sen-
tences in agreement and OTHER 10 sentences in
agreement. TEXT was almost in perfect agree-
ment, while OTHER was used more frequently by
one annotator.

6.3 Sources of Disagreement

There were two main sources of disagreement be-
tween the annotators: one was in agreeing the la-
bels about the author’s work, and the other was in
distinguishing between background sentences and
those that pertained to specific citations.

In particular, the annotators noticed that when
an author spoke about how their work was differ-
ent to someone else’s, they often broke this down
over several sentences. The guidelines instructed
the annotators to only mark what was linguisti-
cally indicated but they were unsure if this meant
in the text in general or in that particular sentence.
This led to annotators disagreeing on A-COMP-
DIFF and A-GAP/A-DESC, as can be seen in Ta-
ble 3. Our annotation guidelines need to be re-
viewed with some very specific examples that in-
corporate these scenarios with clear instructions
on how to take linguistic markings into account.
This will be a challenge for automated classifica-
tion of our labels and writing feedback. We need
to consider carefully how this lexical information
can be captured.

In disagreement about background sentences
compared to citation sentences, seen in Table 4,
one annotator highlighted that some sentences
talked about two specific citations and they la-
belled these as BG-DESC-EP, while the other an-
notator labelled them as CW-DESC. After discus-
sion, it was suggested that including examples of
this kind in the annotation guidelines would have

helped.
Annotators also noted that a sentence may be-

long to two labels. For example, a sentence may
say something positive about a cited work but then
highlight a shortcoming. In the guidelines we in-
struct the annotator to choose the author based la-
bels over cited work labels in this instance. We
acknowledged in choosing the sentence as the an-
notating unit this could occur, and we think this
will prove challenging in automating the labelling.

There were two Related Work sections that in-
cluded references to systems by their names, e.g.
Moses or U-SVM. The annotators struggled with
both of these as they were only given the Related
Work. If they had the full paper, they thought they
would better ascertain if the author was referring
to something that was their own work or another
person’s. One annotator questioned whether these
types of Related Work were more likely to come at
the end of a paper once a reader was familiar with
these terms. Neither annotator thought the guide-
lines could be updated as in this instance it would
have been better to have access to the full paper.
Again, this is going to be a challenging area for
any automated system, especially if it only takes
a submission of the Related Work section into ac-
count. The system will have no way of knowing
if phrases of this kind relate to the author’s work.
It also raises a point that although we have cho-
sen one discipline to work with, Related Work sec-
tions can still be written in different styles. Prior
to this comment, we had not considered if order
within a document impacted the style of the Re-
lated Work. However, it should still fulfil the qual-
ities expected.

6.4 Annotating the Remaining Sentences

Following a discussion between the annotators on
labels that were not in agreement, some changes
were made. A small number of the disagreements
were genuine mistakes with an annotator selecting
the wrong label but most were about the differ-
ences in A-COMP-DIFF versus A-GAP/A-DESC,
and between CW-DESC and the Background cat-
egories. This resulted in an increase in agreement
to 0.85 and raw agreement to 87.3%. Part of the
reason for this discussion and alignment was to
ensure that the annotator who had completed the
full corpus was confident about their decisions.
They reviewed the remaining sentences following
the discussion. The labels from the annotator who



98

completed all sentences will be used as the stan-
dard for the full corpus to develop our automated
system in the future.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

We have developed a new annotation schema de-
signed to capture author intentions in Related
Work sections. Our annotation scheme focuses
on qualities that should be present in a Related
Work section and that will support writing feed-
back. Our schema has 14 categories that will be
used in feedback. We report good agreement in
our annotation, which is comparable to other an-
notation experiments within our field. Our ex-
periments help us to refine our annotation guide-
lines for any future annotation activities and make
us aware of challenges we may encounter when
trying to automate the classification of the labels
within our schema for feedback.

In future work we plan to use our annotated cor-
pus in supervised machine learning to automate
the classification of our labels. Work is currently
underway to determine features that will best rep-
resent the schema labels, taking into account the
challenges our annotators raised. This classifica-
tion model will be an important part of our au-
tomated writing system. However, this classifier
will treat sentences as individual components, and
we need to put these sentences into context to pro-
vide meaningful feedback. Future work will in-
volve experiments to investigate how context can
be derived from combining the individual labels to
provide feedback that adequately reflects the writ-
ing.

References
Kitto Kirsty Knight Simon Buckingham Shum Simon

Abel, Sophie. 2018. Designing personalised, auto-
mated feedback to develop students research writing
skills. In Proceedings of 2018 Australasian Soci-
ety for Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education,
pages 15–24.

Claire Aitchison, Janice Catterall, Pauline Ross, and
Shelley Burgin. 2012. ’Tough love and tears’: learn-
ing doctoral writing in the sciences. Higher Educa-
tion Research & Development, 31(4):435–447.

M A Angrosh, Stephen Cranefield, and Nigel Stanger.
2012. Context identification of sentences in research
articles: Towards developing intelligent tools for the
research community. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 19(04):481–515.

Laurence Anthony and George V. Lashkia. 2003.
Mover: A Machine Learning Tool to Assist in the
Reading and Writing of Technical Papers. Pro-
fessional Communication, IEEE Transactions on,
46:185 – 193.

Steven Bird, Robert Dale, Bonnie Dorr, Bryan Gibson,
Mark Joseph, Min-Yen Kan, Dongwon Lee, Brett
Powley, Dragomir Radev, and Yee Fan Tan. 2008.
The ACL Anthology Reference Corpus: A Refer-
ence Dataset for Bibliographic Research in Compu-
tational Linguistics. In LREC 2008.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and psychological
measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Elena Cotos and Nick Pendar. 2016. Discourse classi-
fication into rhetorical functions for awe feedback.
calico journal, 33(1):92–116.

Valéria D Feltrim, Simone Teufel, Maria Graças V das
Nunes, and Sandra M Aluı́sio. 2006. Argumenta-
tive zoning applied to critiquing novices scientific
abstracts. In Computing Attitude and Affect in Text:
Theory and Applications, pages 233–246. Springer.

Beatrı́z Fisas, Francesco Ronzano, and Horacio Sag-
gion. 2016. A multi-layered annotated corpus of sci-
entific papers. In LREC 2016.

Beatriz Fisas, Horacio Saggion, and Francesco Ron-
zano. 2015. On the discoursive structure of com-
puter graphics research papers. In Proceedings of
the 9th linguistic annotation workshop, pages 42–
51, Denver, Colorado, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Debanjan Ghosh, Aquila Khanam, Yubo Han, and
Smaranda Muresan. 2016. Coarse-grained argu-
mentation features for scoring persuasive essays. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 549–554, Berlin, Germany. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Yufan Guo, Anna Korhonen, Maria Liakata, Ilona
Silins, Lin Sun, and Ulla Stenius. 2010. Identifying
the Information Structure of Scientific Abstracts: An
Investigation of Three Different Schemes. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Uppsala, Swe-
den.

Ken Hyland. 2015. Genre, discipline and iden-
tity. Journal of English for Academic Purposes,
19(C):32–43.

Barbara Kamler and Pat Thomson. 2006. Helping doc-
toral students write: Pedagogies for supervision.
Routledge.

Christian Kirschner, Judith Eckle-Kohler, and Iryna
Gurevych. 2015. Linking the thoughts: Analysis of
argumentation structures in scientific publications.
pages 1–11.

https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2011.559195
https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2011.559195
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324912000277
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324912000277
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324912000277
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPC.2003.816789
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPC.2003.816789
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/pdf/445_paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/pdf/445_paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/pdf/445_paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/174_Paper.pdf"
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/174_Paper.pdf"
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W15-1605
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W15-1605
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P16-2089
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P16-2089
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W10-1913
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W10-1913
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W10-1913
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203969816
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203969816
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W15-0501
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W15-0501


99

Maria Liakata, Shyamasree Saha, Simon Dobnik,
Colin Batchelor, and Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann.
2012. Automatic recognition of conceptualization
zones in scientific articles and two life science ap-
plications. Bioinformatics, 28(7):991–1000.

Joseph A. Maxwell. 2006. Literature Reviews of, and
for, Educational Research: A Commentary on Boote
and Beile’s “Scholars Before Researchers”. Educa-
tional Researcher, 35(9):28–31.

Yoko Mizuta and Nigel Collier. 2004. Zone identi-
fication in biology articles as a basis for informa-
tion extraction. In Proceedings of the international
joint workshop on natural language processing in
biomedicine and its applications, pages 29–35. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Christoph Müller and Michael Strube. 2006. Multi-
level annotation of linguistic data with MMAX2.
In Sabine Braun, Kurt Kohn, and Joybrato Mukher-
jee, editors, Corpus Technology and Language Ped-
agogy: New Resources, New Tools, New Methods,
pages 197–214. Peter Lang, Frankfurt a.M., Ger-
many.

Charles Oppenheim and Susan P Renn. 1978. Highly
cited old papers and the reasons why they continue
to be cited. Journal of the American Society for In-
formation Science, 29(5):225–231.

Brian Paltridge and Sue Starfield. 2007. Thesis and
Dissertation Writing in a Second Language. Rout-
ledge.

Ulrich Schäfer, Christian Spurk, and Jörg Steffen.
2012. A Fully Coreference-annotated Corpus of
Scholarly Papers from the ACL Anthology. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 1059–
1070, Mumbai, India. The COLING 2012 Organiz-
ing Committee.

Christian Stab and Iryna Gurevych. 2014. Identify-
ing argumentative discourse structures in persuasive
essays. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 46–56, Doha, Qatar. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

J. Swales. 1981. Aspects of article introductions. Lan-
guage Studies Unit.

J.M. Swales. 1990. Genre Analysis: English in aca-
demic and research settings. Cambridge University
Press.

Simone Teufel. 1999. Argumentative zoning: Infor-
mation extraction from scientific text. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh.

Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Colin Batch-
elor. 2009. Towards domain-independent argumen-
tative zoning: Evidence from chemistry and compu-
tational linguistics. In Proceedings of the 2009 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1493–1502, Singapore. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Dan Tidhar.
2006a. An annotation scheme for citation function.
In Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Dis-
course and Dialogue, pages 80–87, Sydney, Aus-
tralia. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Dan Tidhar.
2006b. Automatic classification of citation function.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
103–110, Sydney, Australia. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Paul Thompson and Chris Tribble. 2001. Looking at
Citations: Using Corpora in English for Academic
Purposes. Language Learning Technology, 5(3):91
– 105.

Stephen E Toulmin. 2003. The Uses of Argument.
Cambridge University Press.

Melvin Weinstock. 1971. Citation indexes. encyclo-
pedia of library and information science. volume 5.
eds. a. kent & h. lancour.

https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X035009028
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X035009028
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X035009028
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W04-1205
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W04-1205
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W04-1205
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203960813
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203960813
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C12-2103
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C12-2103
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1006
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1006
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1006
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D09-1155
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D09-1155
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D09-1155
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W06-1312
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W06-1613



