




































Unbounded Stress in Subregular Phonology


Proceedings of the 16th Workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology, pages 135–143
Florence, Italy. August 2, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

135

Unbounded Stress in Subregular Phonology

Yiding Hao

Yale University

New Haven, CT, USA

yiding.hao@yale.edu

Samuel Andersson

Yale University

New Haven, CT, USA

samuel.andersson@yale.edu

Abstract

This paper situates culminative unbounded

stress systems within the subregular hierar-

chy for functions. While Baek (2018) has ar-

gued that such systems can be uniformly un-

derstood as input tier-based strictly local con-

straints, we show here that default-to-opposite-

side and default-to-same-side stress systems

belong to distinct subregular classes when they

are viewed as functions that assign primary

stress to underlying forms. While the former

system can be captured by input tier-based

input strictly local functions, a subsequential

function class that we define here, the lat-

ter system is not subsequential, though it is

weakly deterministic according to McCollum

et al.’s (2018) non-interaction criterion. Our

results motivate the extension of recently pro-

posed subregular language classes to subregu-

lar functions and argue in favor of McCollum

et al.’s definition of weak determinism over

that of Heinz and Lai (2013).

1 Introduction

The treatment of unbounded stress (Baek, 2018),

Uyghur backness harmony (Mayer and Major,

2018), and Sanskrit n-retroflexion (Graf and

Mayer, 2018) in subregular phonology has given

rise to a rich collection of extensions of the tier-

based strictly local languages (TSL; Heinz et al.,

2011) as formal descriptions of the typology of

phonotactic dependencies. These language classes

formalize the notion of local dependencies de-

fined on tiers. While the TSL languages assume

that each segment is either projected to the tier or

not, the extensions allow for rich tier-projection

schemata that are sensitive to local context.

Meanwhile, the formal study of phonological

processes has shown that mappings from underly-

ing representations to surface representations of-

ten exhibit a form of locality analogous to the no-

tion captured by TSL languages. This insight is

formalized by the input strictly local (ISL; Chan-

dlee, 2014), output strictly local (OSL; Chan-

dlee et al., 2015), and input–output strictly local

(IOSL; Chandlee et al., In prep) functions, pro-

posed as functional counterparts of the TSL lan-

guages. Chandlee (2014) argues that most phono-

logical processes are captured by these classes of

functions, and of the ones that are not, Heinz and

Lai (2013) and McCollum et al. (2018) propose

two versions of the weakly deterministic functions

that describe non-deterministic harmony patterns.

This paper examines culminative unbounded

stress systems as string-to-string mappings. Baek

(2018) analyzes these systems as phonotactic con-

straints and shows that they are not TSL in gen-

eral. To capture them, Baek defines the tier-

based strictly local languages with structural fea-

tures (TSL-SF), an extension of TSL in which the

tier-projection mechanism is sensitive to the posi-

tion of segments within prosodic units. The TSL-

SF languages were later subsumed by Graf and

Mayer’s (2018) input–output tier-based strictly

local (IO-TSL) languages, in which the tier-

projection mechanism is implemented by an ar-

bitrary IOSL function. As mappings, we show

that default-to-opposite-side (DO) stress systems

can be captured using a similar approach. Exam-

ples of such systems include stressing the leftmost

long vowel and assigning rightmost stress in the

absence of long vowels. We propose the input

tier-based input strictly local (I-TISL) functions

as a functional analogue of the generalized tier-

projection mechanism of the IO-TSL languages.

Based on the stress system of Abkhaz, we advocate

for a tier projection that is slightly more general

than the restricted mechanism used in Baek. Next,

we show that default-to-same-side (DS) stress sys-

tems, such as that of Lhasa Tibetan, are not subse-

quential. Examples of DS systems include those

in which the leftmost long vowel is stressed, and



136

the leftmost vowel is stressed when all vowels are

short. We argue that DS systems can be naturally

captured using McCollum et al.’s (2018) definition

of weak determinism but not using Heinz and Lai’s

(2013) definition, therefore arguing in favor of the

former definition.

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2

states basic notation and definitions used through-

out this paper. Section 3 defines the I-TISL func-

tions and shows that they can capture the DO stress

system of Abkhaz. Section 4 considers Lhasa Ti-

betan and its relation to the two definitions of weak

determinism. Section 5 presents a discussion of

these results and their connection with analyses of

stress based onmetrical grid theory. Section 6 con-

cludes.

2 Preliminaries

As usual, N denotes the set of nonnegative inte-
gers. Σ and Γ denote finite alphabets not including
the left and right word boundary symbols⋊ and⋉,
respectively. The length of a string x is denoted
by |x|, and λ denotes the empty string. Alphabet
symbols are identified with strings of length 1, and
individual strings are identified with singleton sets

of strings. For k ∈ N, αk denotes α concatenated
with itself k-many times, α∗ denotes

∪∞
i=0 α

i, and

α+ denotes αα∗. The longest common prefix of a
set of strings A is the longest string lcp(A) such
that every string in A begins with lcp(A). The k-
suffix of a string x, denoted suffk(x), is the string
consisting of the last k-many symbols of ⋊kx.
The reverse of a string x = x1x2 . . . xn, denoted
xR, is the string xnxn−1 . . . x1. For any functions
f : A → B and g : B → C, the notation g ◦f rep-
resents the function given by (g◦f)(x) = g(f(x)).
A function f : Σ∗ → Γ∗ is same-length if for all
x ∈ Σ∗, |f(x)| = |x|.

2.1 Subsequential Functions

This subsection presents an algebraic definition

of the subsequential functions, analogous to the

Nerode–Myhill characterization of the regular lan-

guages. We use the translations of a function f to
describe the possible behaviors of a subsequential

finite-state transducer (SFST) for f , and we iden-
tify each translation of f with a state of theminimal
SFST for f .

Definition 1. Let f : Σ∗ → Γ∗. We define the
function f← : Σ∗ → Γ∗ by

f←(x) := lcp ({f(xy)|y ∈ Σ∗}) .

For any x, y ∈ Σ∗, f→x (y) denotes the string such
that f(xy) = f←(x)f→x (y). We refer to the func-
tion f→x as the translation of f by x and to f

← as
f top.1

Intuitively, f←(x) refers to the output of the
minimal SFST for f after reading the input x, and
the translation f→x describes the behavior of the
minimal SFST upon reading further input symbols.

Definition 2 (Raney, 1958). A function f : Σ∗ →
Γ∗ is subsequential if the set {f→x |x ∈ Σ∗} is fi-
nite. We say that f is left-subsequential if it is
subsequential and right-subsequential if the func-

tion g : Σ∗ → Γ∗ defined by g(x) := f
(
xR

)R
is subsequential. We say that f is sequential or
left-sequential if f is subsequential and f = f←.
We say that f is right-sequential if the function

g : Σ∗ → Γ∗ defined by g(x) := f
(
xR

)R
is se-

quential.

The strictly local functions are defined by as-

suming that each translation corresponds to an i-
suffix of the input and a j-suffix of the output.

Definition 3 (Chandlee et al., In prep). For i, j ∈
N, a function f : Σ∗ → Γ∗ is i, j-input–output
strictly local (i, j-IOSL) if for every x, y ∈ Σ∗, if
suffi−1(x) = suffi−1(y) and suffj−1(f←(x)) =
suffj−1(f←(y)), then f→x = f

→
y . If the func-

tion g(x) := f
(
xR

)R
is i, j-IOSL, then f is right

i, j-input–output strictly local (right i, j-IOSL). A
function is i-input strictly local (i-ISL) if it is i, 1-
IOSL and j-output strictly local (j-OSL) if it is
1, j-IOSL. A function is input–output strictly local
(IOSL), input strictly local (ISL), or output strictly

local (OSL) if if is i, j-IOSL, i-ISL, or j-OSL for
some i, j ∈ N, respectively. A function is homo-
morphic if it is sequential and 1, 1-IOSL.

Since there are only finitely many possible i-
suffixes and j-suffixes, it is clear that all IOSL
functions are subsequential.

3 DO Stress and Tier Projection

In culminative unbounded stress systems, primary

stress is assigned to either the first or last sylla-

ble that fulfills a particular criterion—e.g., having

a long vowel. In the absence of such syllables,

primary stress is assigned to either the first or last

syllable by default. DO stress systems are those

1This terminology follows Sakarovitch (2009, pp. 692–

693). In the transducer inference literature, Oncina et al.

(1993) refer to f→x as the tails of x in f , and Chandlee et al.
(2015) refer to f← as the prefix function associated to f .



137

in which qualifying syllables closest to one word

edge receive stress, while the syllable closest to the

other edge receives stress by default. In DS stress

systems, qualifying syllables closest to one word

edge receive stress, and the syllable closest to the

same edge receives stress by default. For example,

in the typology of Hayes (1995), leftmost heavy

otherwise rightmost (LHOR) and rightmost heavy

otherwise leftmost systems (RHOL) are DO, while

leftmost heavy otherwise leftmost (LHOL) and

rightmost heavy otherwise rightmost (RHOR) sys-

tems are DS.

This section considers the DO stress system

of Abkhaz, which we describe in Subsection 3.1.

Subsection 3.2 defines the I-TSL functions and

shows how they can capture the Abkhaz stress sys-

tem.

3.1 Abkhaz Stress

Below we illustrate the stress system of the stan-

dard Abzhuy variety of Abkhaz ([abk], Northwest

Caucasian), as analyzed by Dybo (1977; refined

by Spruit, 1986 and Trigo, 1992). The Abkhaz

stress system depends on a set of phonologically-

contrastive accentual specifications. In the data

considered here, every syllable of everymorpheme

is lexically specified as either dominant (D) or re-

cessive (R; see Spruit, 1986 for accentual speci-

fications which do not align with syllable bound-

aries). The so-called Dybo’s Rule for stress states:

assign primary stress to the leftmost D not immedi-

ately followed by another D (Spruit, 1986, p. 38).

We mark dominant syllables by underlining, and

hyphens indicate morpheme boundaries. Evidence

for accentual specifications can be found in Spruit

(1986).

The Abkhaz stress pattern is illustrated in Ta-

bles 1–3. When a word contains only a single

dominant syllable, it receives the primary stress.

When there is a span of multiple dominant sylla-

bles which are all adjacent, the rightmost such syl-

lable is stressed. When there are multiple spans of

adjacent D syllables, the rightmost D of the left-

most span is stressed. In words with only D syl-

lables, as well as in words with only R syllables,

stress is final.

3.2 I-TISL Functions

Let us now define the I-TISL functions and show

how they can handle the Abkhaz stress system. To

do so, we extend the notion of tier projection used

in the TSL languages (Heinz et al., 2011; Baek,

Form Translation

a-ˈʈ͡ ʂʰa-ɡa ‘(the) hoe’
də-t͡ sʰa-la-ˈwa-ma ‘does (s)he usually go?’
də-t͡ sʰa-ˈnə ‘(s)he having gone’

Table 1: The rightmost consecutive dominant syllable

receives primary stress (Spruit, 1986, pp. 50, 53).

Form Translation

ˈa-va-t͡ sʼa-ra ‘to put next to’
də-ˈɡəla-ɡʷuʃa-ma ‘did (s)he go and stand,

alas?’

a-ˈʁʷakʼʲaməsa ‘(the) poniard’

Table 2: Only the leftmost span of Ds contains a pri-

mary stress (Spruit, 1986, pp. 44, 47, 73–74).

2018; Mayer and Major, 2018; Graf and Mayer,

2018) to the case of subregular functions. There,

tier projections are formalized as functions that

delete certain symbols of their inputs.

Definition 4. A tier-projection function on Σ is a
function π : Σ∗ → Σ∗ such that for any x =
x1x2 . . . xn ∈ Σ∗ we have π(x) = y1y2 . . . yn,
where for each i, either yi = xi or yi = λ.

TSL languages make use of tier projection by

only enforcing local dependencies based on sym-

bols projected to the tier, thereby bypassing sym-

bols not projected to the tier. To apply the tier pro-

jection system to strictly local functions, we only

consider symbols on the tier when enforcing strict

locality. Whereas i-ISL functions require that their
translations by a string x correspond to the last
(i− 1)-many symbols of x, tier-based i-ISL func-
tions associate translations with the last (i − 1)-
many symbols on the tier, which we identify with

suffi−1(π←(x)).

Definition 5. A function f : Σ∗ → Γ∗ is i-
input tier-based j-input strictly local (i-I-j-TISL)
if there exists an i-ISL tier projection function π on
Σ such that for all x, y ∈ Σ∗, if suffj−1(π←(x)) =
suffj−1(π←(y)), then f→x = f

→
y . We call π a

tier projection for f . A function is input tier-based
input strictly local (I-TISL) if it is i-I-j-TISL for
some i and j.

We formalize the Abkhaz stress system as fol-

lows. Alphabet symbols represent individual syl-

lables; dominant and recessive syllables are rep-

resented as D and R, respectively. Stressed syl-

lables are represented as D́ and Ŕ. Following the



138

Form Translation

a-pʰa-ˈra ‘to pleat’
maa-ˈkʼə ‘one handle”

Table 3: Stress is final when all syllables have the same

accentual status (Spruit, 1986, pp. 45–46).

discussion from Subsection 3.1, the Abkhaz stress

function replaces the leftmost D not followed by

another D with D́. If the input does not contain

any Ds, then the final R is replaced with Ŕ.

Definition 6. The Abkhaz stress function α :
{D,R}∗ → {D,R, D́,Ŕ}∗ is defined as follows.
For i ≥ 0, j > 0, and y ∈ {λ} ∪ R{D,R}∗,

α(RiDjy) := RiDj−1D́y

α(Rj) := Rj−1Ŕ

α(λ) := λ.

Proposition 7. The Abkhaz stress function is 2-I-
3-TISL.

Proof. Let π : {D,R}∗ → {D,R}∗ be the tier-
projection function defined as follows.

• Any D not preceded by another D is pro-

jected.

• Any R preceded by a D is projected.

It is easy to see that π is 2-ISL. Observe that for
any x, π(x) ∈ (DR)∗{λ,D}.
We now show that α is 2-I-3-TISL with tier pro-

jection π. To that end, we need to show that each
translation α→x is determined by suff

2(π←(x)).
Observe that there are four possible values for

suff2(π←(x)): ⋊⋊, ⋊D, DR, or RD. We consider
each of these cases one-by-one.

• Suppose suff2(π←(x)) = ⋊⋊. This means
that x = Ri for some i ≥ 0. Stress has not yet
been assigned, so α←(x) = Ri−1 if i > 0 and
α←(x) = λ otherwise. For any y ∈ {D,R}∗,

α→x (y) =

{
Rα(y), i > 0

α(y), i = 0.

• Suppose suff2(π←(x)) = ⋊D. This means
that x = RiDj , where j > 0 and i ≥ 0.
Stress has not yet been assigned, so α←(x) =
RiDj−1. For any input of the form DmRny,
wherem,n ≥ 0 and y ∈ {D,R}∗,

α→x (D
mRny) =

{
DmD́Rny, n > 0

DmyD́, Rny ∈ D∗.

• Suppose suff2(π←(x)) ∈ {DR,RD}. Now,
stress has already been assigned, so α←(x) =
α(x) and for all y, α→x (y) = y.

In all four cases, we have seen that α→x does
not depend on x, though it does depend on
suff2(π←(x)). Therefore, α is 2-I-3-TISL.

In the construction described above, the fact

that π is allowed to be 2-ISL enables π to only
project symbols marking the boundaries between

contiguous spans of Ds and Rs. In the original

tier-projection mechanism of Heinz et al. (2011),

for each symbol u ∈ Σ, either all tokens of umust
be projected to the tier, or no tokens of u may be
projected.

Definition 8. A function is tier-based j-input
strictly local (j-TISL) if it is 1-I-j-TISL and has
a homomorphic tier projection. A function is tier-

based input strictly local (TISL) if it is j-TISL for
some j.

To justify the use of a 2-ISL tier projection, we
show that the primitive tier-projection mechanism

does not suffice to capture Abkhaz stress.

Proposition 9. The Abkhaz stress function is not

TISL.

Proof. Let π : {D,R}∗ → {D,R}∗ be a homo-
morphic tier projection. We will show that for ev-

ery j > 0, there exist x, y, z ∈ {D,R}∗ such that
suffj−1(π←(x)) = suffj−1(π←(y)), butα→x (z) ≠
α→y (z).

Fix j > 0, and suppose π projects D. Then,
suffj−1(π←(Dj)) = suffj−1(π←(DRDj)) =
Dj−1, but α→

Dj
(R) = D́R, while α→

DRDj
(R) =

R. Next, suppose π projects R. Then,
suffj−1(π←(Rj)) = suffj−1(π←(DRj)) = Rj−1,
but α→

Rj
(D) = RD́, while α→

DRj
(D) = D. Fi-

nally, suppose π projects neither R nor D. Then,
suffj−1(π←(R)) = suffj−1(π←(DR)) = ⋊j−1,
but α→R (D) = RD́, while α

→
DR(D) = D. There-

fore, α is not j-TISL for any j and for any π.

In addition to exceeding the power of TISL

functions, our tier projection is also consider-

ably more sophisticated than the projection used

in Baek (2018). There, Baek formalizes LHOL,

LHOR, RHOL, and RHOR systems as phonotac-

tic constraints and projects heavy, stressed, word-

initial, and word-final syllables to the tier. She

achieves this by using the primitive tier-projection

mechanism with an augmented alphabet in which



139

syllables are marked as being word-initial, word-

final, or word-medial. To avoid feature coding

(Rogers, 1997), Baek stipulates that syllables can-

not be marked in any other way. Since Dybo’s

Rule is sensitive to more nuanced structural infor-

mation, we argue that arbitrary ISL tier projections

are required for DO stress systems in general.

4 DS Stress and Weak Determinism

We have now shown that the DO stress system of

Abkhaz is I-TISL. This section turns to DS stress

systems. Subsection 4.1 introduces the DS stress

system of Lhasa Tibetan, and in Subsection 4.2

we show that this stress system is not subsequen-

tial. Subsection 4.3 considers two definitions of

the weakly deterministic functions, proposed by

Heinz and Lai (2013) and McCollum et al. (2018),

and argue that the latter definition more naturally

describes the Lhasa Tibetan stress system than the

former.

4.1 Lhasa Tibetan Stress

We describe here the stress system of Tibetan

([bod], Sino-Tibetan) using data from the Lhasa

variety, as described by Dawson (1980). The de-

scriptive generalization about Tibetan stress is as

follows: primary stress falls on the leftmost long

vowel, and if there are no long vowels, on the

leftmost vowel. Stress is indicated with the IPA

primary stress diacritic, and long vowels are un-

derlined. Below we illustrate the generalizations

about Tibetan stress. All of our data come from

Gordon (2007, p. 37), who in turn cites Dawson

(1980). The same data can also be found in Odden

(1979), who cites personal communication with N.

Nornang.

The Lhasa Tibetan stress pattern is illustrated in

Tables 4 and 5. When a word contains one or more

long vowels, the leftmost long vowel receives the

primary stress. When there are no long vowels, the

leftmost vowel has primary stress. Thus, this is an

example of a DS stress system.

Form Translation

ámˈtɔ̂ː ‘person from Amdo’
kʰáˈpáː ‘telephone’
ˈtýːtṹː ‘shirt’

Table 4: The leftmost long vowel receives primary

stress.

Form Translation

ˈlápʈá ‘school’
ˈɲúɡú ‘pen’
ˈwòmá ‘milk’

Table 5: Default stress is initial.

4.2 Non-Subsequentiality

Intuitively, the behavior of an SFST is to scan its

input from left to right, emitting output symbols

deterministically as it does so. This paradigm of

computation is problematic for DS stress systems

such as that of Lhasa Tibetan. In order to deter-

mine whether or not the first syllable of its input

should be stressed, an SFST implementing Lhasa

Tibetan stress must scan the entire input to check

for the presence of long vowels. However, once

the SFST has determined that an input does not

have any long vowels, it no longer has access to

the initial syllable, and therefore cannot mark it as

stressed. The following discussion makes this in-

tuition rigorous by showing that the Lhasa Tibetan

stress system is not subsequential.

We formalize the Lhasa Tibetan stress system

as follows. Syllables with long-vowel nuclei are

represented as H, while syllables with short-vowel

nuclei are represented as L. Stressed syllables are

represented as H́ and Ĺ, respectively. If an input

contains at least one H, then the first H receives

stress. Otherwise, the first syllable receives stress.

Definition 10. The Tibetan stress function τ :
{H,L}∗ → {H,L, H́,Ĺ}∗ is defined as follows.
For i ≥ 0, j > 0, and y ∈ {H,L}∗,

τ(LiHy) := LiH́y

τ(Lj) := ĹLj−1

τ(λ) := λ.

Proposition 11. The Tibetan stress function is not

subsequential.

Proof. We will show that τ has infinitely many
translations. Consider a string of the form Li,

where i > 0. Observe that τ(LiH) = LiH́ and
τ(Li) = ĹLi−1. Therefore,

lcp({τ(LiH), τ(Li)}) = λ,

so τ←(Li) = λ, hence τ→
Li
(H) = LiH́. But this

means that if i ̸= j, then

LiH́ = τ→
Li
(H) ̸= τ→

Lj
(H) = LjH́.



140

Thus, each possible value of i induces a distinct
translation τ→

Li
, so we conclude that τ is not subse-

quential.

4.3 Weak Determinism

The current subregular approach to non-

subsequential processes is represented by the

weakly deterministic functions, a class proposed

by Heinz and Lai (2013) in order to distinguish

the unattested sour grapes harmony process from

attested harmony processes.2 Dominant/recessive

and stem-controlled vowel harmony (Heinz and

Lai, 2013; McCollum et al., 2018), Tutrugbu ATR

harmony (McCollum et al., 2018), and Copperbelt

Bemba tone spreading (McCollum et al., 2018;

Smith and O’Hara, 2019) have so far been shown

to be non-subsequential but weakly deterministic

in the sense of Heinz and Lai.

Definition 12 (Heinz and Lai, 2013). A function

f : Σ∗ → Γ∗ is markup-free weakly deterministic
if there exist functions g : Σ∗ → Σ∗ and h : Σ∗ →
Γ∗ such that

• f = h ◦ g;

• either g is left-subsequential and h is right-
subsequential or g is right-subsequential and
h is left-subsequential; and

• for all x ∈ Σ∗, |g(x)| ≤ |x|.

Elgot and Mezei (1965) show that every finite-

state function can be decomposed into a left-

subsequential function and a right-subsequential

function. In their construction, the first function in

the composition encodes state information into its

input, which allows the second function to deter-

minize its computation. The above definition at-

tempts to prohibit this kind of encoding by requir-

ing that g cannot introduce new alphabet symbols
or increase the length of its input. McCollum et al.

(2018) argue that a limited form of state encoding

is still possible under Heinz and Lai’s criterion, and

instead advocate for a more explicit notion of non-

interaction between the two functions.

Definition 13 (McCollum et al., 2018). Let f :
Σ∗ → Γ∗ be a same-length function.3 Fix x ∈ Σ∗,
and write x = x1x2 . . . xn and y = y1y2 . . . yn so

2However, it is currently unknown whether this class of

functions is distinct from the class of finite-state functions.
3McCollum et al. additionally require that f be sequential.

We relax this assumption here.

that for each i, xi ∈ Σ and yi ∈ Γ. The µ-factors
of x with respect to f are the set

µ(f, x) := {⟨i, xi, yi⟩|yi ̸= xi}.

The basic intuition behindMcCollum et al.’s cri-

terion is that the two functions in the decomposi-

tion cannot feed or bleed one another. They take

this to mean that neither function can cause the

other to change its behavior for some position of

the input.

Definition 14 (McCollum et al., 2018). A function

f : Σ∗ → Γ∗ is interaction-free weakly determin-
istic if there exist an alphabet∆ ⊇ Σ and functions
g : Σ∗ → ∆∗ and h : ∆∗ → Γ∗ such that

• f = h ◦ g;

• either g is left-subsequential and h is right-
subsequential or g is right-subsequential and
h is left-subsequential; and

• for all x ∈ Σ∗, µ(f, x) = µ(g, x) ∪ µ(h, x).4

This criterion naturally describes the Tibetan

stress function. We can decompose this func-

tion into a left-subsequential function that assigns

stress to the leftmost H and a right-subsequential

function that assigns initial stress in the absence of

an H. These two functions do not interact, since

each only assigns stress if the other does not.

Proposition 15. The Tibetan stress function is

interaction-free weakly deterministic.

Proof. Let us define g : {H,L}∗ → {H,L, H́}∗
and h : {H,L, H́}∗ → {H,L, H́,Ĺ}∗ as follows.
For i ≥ 0, y ∈ {H,L}∗, and z /∈ L+,

g(LiHy) := LiH́y

g(Li) := Li

h(z) := z

h(LLi) := ĹLi.

It is clear that τ = h ◦ g, g is left-sequential, and
h is right-subsequential. Observe that h(x) = x if
g(x) ̸= x and h(x) ̸= x if g(x) = x, so for all
x, either µ(h, x) = ∅ and µ(τ, x) = µ(g, x) or
µ(g, x) = ∅ and µ(τ, x) = µ(h, x). Therefore, τ
is interaction-free weakly deterministic.

4Note that this criterion implicitly requires that f , g, and
h all be same-length.



141

On the other hand, it is difficult to see how

the Tibetan stress function can be made to satisfy

Heinz and Lai’s definition of weak determinism.

The decomposition presented above violates the

markup-free criterion because g introduces new al-
phabet symbols to its input. This is an inherent

property of stress assignment, since inputs must be

annotated with stress markers. In order to satisfy

the markup-free criterion, then, any stress assigned

by the first function must be encoded without us-

ing a designated stress marker. We conjecture that

no such decomposition exists.

5 Discussion

We have now given two separate subregular treat-

ments of DO and DS stress systems. Subsection

5.1 shows how our implementation of the Abkhaz

and the Tibetan stress functions mirrors existing

phonological analyses of stress systems according

to metrical grid theory. Subsection 5.2 discusses

the implications of our results for the hierarchy of

subregular functions.

5.1 Relation to Metrical Grid Theory

The use of tiers and tier projection functions to in-

vestigate phonological complexity is of course not

novel. One way of analyzing stress is in terms of

so-called metrical grids (Liberman, 1975; Hayes,

1995; Kager, 1995; and many others), which are

effectively tiers stacked on top of each other. The

tiers of metrical grids correspond closely with the

tiers used in this paper. In other words, our analy-

sis alignswell with previous analyses of stress. Be-

low we explain metrical grids, and highlight some

similarities with the present paper.

The metrical grid below represents the word

ˌæləˈbæmə ‘Alabama’ (Kager, 1995, p. 369). Tier
2 identifies the primary stress, tier 1 indicates all

stresses, whether primary or secondary, and tier 0

shows the division of the word into syllables.

Tier 2 ∗
Tier 1 ∗ ∗
Tier 0 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗

æ lə bæ mə

Figure 1: The metrical grid for ˌæləˈbæmə ‘Alabama.’

Metrical grids can be used to understand the

stress systems of Abkhaz and Lhasa Tibetan. The

brief overview below follows Kager (1995), which

interested readers should consult for a detailed

analysis of both DO and DS systems. For Abk-

haz, we begin with a tier 0 where D syllables have

two asterisks, and R syllables one. In addition to

the final syllable, any ∗∗ on tier 0 not immediately
followed by another ∗∗ projects onto tier 1. Fi-
nally, the leftmost tier 1 asterisk projects onto tier

2. This gives grids like the one in Figure 2, for the

word a-ˈʁʷakʼʲaməsa ‘the poniard.’

Tier 2 ∗
Tier 1 ∗ ∗ ∗
Tier 0 ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗

a ʁʷa kʼʲa mə sa

Figure 2: The metrical grid for a-ˈʁʷakʼʲaməsa ‘the
poniard.’

Aswe saw for English, a tier 2 asterisk identifies

the primary stress. It is not clear whether tier 1

asterisks encode secondary stress in Abkhaz, but

there are segmental alternations between [ə] and
[∅] that are affected by tier 1 (see Spruit, 1986,
pp. 73–77).

For words with no dominant syllables, such as

maa-ˈkʼə ‘one handle,’ we simply project the right-
most syllable from tier 0 onto tier 1. Again, the

leftmost (and only) tier 1 asterisk projects onto tier

2.

Tier 2 ∗
Tier 1 ∗
Tier 0 ∗ ∗ ∗

ma a kʼə

Figure 3: The metrical grid for maa-ˈkʼə ‘one handle.’

For Lhasa Tibetan, we have no underlying ac-

centual specifications, but instead place either one

or two asterisks on tier 0 depending on whether the

vowel is short or long. The leftmost tier 0 ∗∗ is pro-
jected onto tier 1.5 The leftmost ∗ of tier 1 projects
onto tier 2, indicating primary stress. For ˈtýːtṹː
‘shirt,’ this gives the following.

Tier 2 ∗
Tier 1 ∗ ∗
Tier 0 ∗∗ ∗∗

týː tṹː

Figure 4: The metrical grid for ˈtýːtṹː ‘shirt.’

5We are not aware of data on secondary stress.



142

In words without any long vowels, the same sys-

tem produces the desired result. The word in Fig-

ure 5 is ˈwòmá ‘milk.’ By convention, since tier 1
is empty, we project the leftmost ∗ of tier 0 instead
(Kager, 1995, pp. 384–385).

Tier 2 ∗
Tier 1

Tier 0 ∗ ∗
wò má

Figure 5: The metrical grid for ˈwòmá ‘milk.’

In the analysis of Abkhaz, the projection of tier

1 mirrors the tier projection used in Proposition 7:

both the asterisks and the projectedDs andRsmark

the location of Ds not followed by Rs, and both

projections are ISL. The projection of tier 2 is ISL

if tier 1 is taken to be the input, in the same way

that the Abkhaz stress function reflects a strictly

local dependency enforced over an ISL tier. In the

analysis of Tibetan, the decomposition of τ into g
and h is analogous to the convention that tier 2 is
projected from tier 0 if tier 1 is empty.

5.2 The Subregular Hierarchy

Our work makes two contributions to the study

of the subregular hierarchy. Firstly, our defini-

tion of the I-TISL functions naturally incorporates

the notion of tier projection developed by Graf and

Mayer (2018) into the family of strictly local func-

tions proposed by Chandlee (2014), Chandlee et al.

(2015), and Chandlee et al. (In prep). Secondly,

we have presented an argument based on stress

assignment that McCollum et al.’s (2018) defini-

tion of weak determinism is more natural for com-

putational phonology than that of Heinz and Lai

(2013).

Intuitively, the difference between DO and DS

stress systems is that the former has a consistent

directionality, while the latter does not. In our im-

plementation of the Akbhaz stress function, the in-

put is scanned from left to right, and when no ap-

propriate D syllable is found, default final stress is

assigned at the end of the computation. Thus, the

Abkhaz stress function may be viewed as a “left-

to-right” process. The contribution of weak deter-

minism to the Tibetan stress function is that the

right-subsequential component allows the process

to “change direction” when no H syllable is found.

If bidirectionality is the primary contribution of

weak determinism to subregular phonology, then

it may be desirable to impose additional structure

on the two components of a weakly deterministic

function. In Proposition 15, for example, g is 2-
TISL, while h is right 1, 1-IOSL.

6 Conclusion

This paper has considered unbounded stress sys-

tems in relation to the subregular hierarchy for

functions. We have shown that the functions for

assigning default-to-opposite (DO) and default-to-

same (DS) stress are not part of the same sub-

regular classes. The DO stress function in Abk-

haz is subsequential, and belongs to the input tier-

based input strictly local (I-TISL) class, which also

captures other DO stress systems. The tiers and

tier projection functions that we use are linguisti-

cally interpretable, sharing many properties with

the phonological representations used in metrical

analyses of stress. However, we have seen that

the DS stress function in Lhasa Tibetan is not sub-

sequential. DS stress can instead be captured us-

ing the class of weakly deterministic functions, and

therefore we favor McCollum et al.’s (2018) defi-

nition of weak determinism over that of Heinz and

Lai (2013).

References

Hyunah Baek. 2018. Computational representation of

unbounded stress: Tiers with structural features. In

Proceedings of CLS 53 (2017), volume 53, pages 13–

24, Chicago, IL. Chicago Linguistic Society.

Jane Chandlee. 2014. Strictly Local Phonological Pro-

cesses. PhD Dissertation, University of Delaware,

Newark, DE.

Jane Chandlee, Rémi Eyraud, and Jeffrey Heinz. 2015.

Output Strictly Local Functions. In Proceedings of

the 14th Meeting on the Mathematics of Language,

pages 112–125, Chicago, IL. Association for Com-

putational Linguistics.

Jane Chandlee, Rémi Eyraud, and Jeffrey Heinz. In

prep. Input–output strictly local functions and their

efficient learnability.

Willa Dawson. 1980. Tibetan Phonology. PhD Disser-

tation, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Vladimir Antonovič Dybo. 1977. Западнокавказкая

аксентная система и проблема ее происхождения.

In Конференция «Ностратические языки

и ностратическое языкознание»: Тезисы

докладов, pages 41–45, Moscow, Soviet Union.

USSR Academy of Sciences.

https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W15-2310


143

Calvin C. Elgot and Jorge E. Mezei. 1965. On Rela-

tions Defined by Generalized Finite Automata. IBM

Journal of Research and Development, 9(1):47–68.

Matthew Gordon. 2007. Syllable Weight: Phonetics,

Phonology, Typology. Routledge, London, United

Kingdom.

Thomas Graf and Connor Mayer. 2018. Sanskrit n-

Retroflexion is Input-Output Tier-Based Strictly Lo-

cal. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Workshop on

Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology,

and Morphology, pages 151–160, Brussels, Bel-

gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bruce Hayes. 1995. Metrical Stress Theory: Princi-

ples and Case Studies. University of Chicago Press,

Chicago, IL.

Jeffrey Heinz and Regine Lai. 2013. Vowel Harmony

and Subsequentiality. In Proceedings of the 13th

Meeting on the Mathematics of Language (MoL 13),

pages 52–63, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Com-

putational Linguistics.

Jeffrey Heinz, Chetan Rawal, and Herbert G. Tan-

ner. 2011. Tier-based Strictly Local Constraints for

Phonology. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-

ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-

tics: Human Language Technologies, pages 58–64,

Portland, OR. Association for Computational Lin-

guistics.

René Kager. 1995. The Metrical Theory of Word

Stress. In John A. Goldsmith, editor, The Hand-

book of Phonological Theory, 1 edition, Blackwell

Handbooks in Linguistics, pages 367–402. Wiley-

Blackwell, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Mark Yoffe Liberman. 1975. The Intonational System

of English. PhD Dissertation, Massachusetts Insti-

tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Connor Mayer and Travis Major. 2018. A Challenge

for Tier-Based Strict Locality from Uyghur Back-

ness Harmony. In Formal Grammar 2018, 23rd In-

ternational Conference, FG 2018, Sofia, Bulgaria,

August 11-12, 2018, Proceedings, volume 10950 of

Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 62–83,

Berlin, Germany. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Adam McCollum, Eric Baković, Anna Mai, and Eric

Meinhardt. 2018. The expressivity of segmental

phonology and the definition of weak determinism.

LingBuzz, lingbuzz/004197.

David Odden. 1979. Principles of Stress Assignment:

A Crosslinguistic View. Studies in the Linguistic

Sciences, 9(1):157–176.

José Oncina, Pedro Garcia, and Enrique Vidal. 1993.

Learning Subsequential Transducers for Pattern

Recognition Interpretation Tasks. IEEE Transac-

tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,

15(5):448–458.

George N. Raney. 1958. Sequential Functions. Jour-

nal of the Association for Computing Machinery,

5(2):177–180.

James Rogers. 1997. Strict LT2 : Regular :: Local :
Recognizable. In Logical Aspects of Computational

Linguistics: First International Conference, LACL

’96 Nancy, France, September 23–25, 1996 Selected

Papers, volume 1328 of Lecture Notes in Computer

Science, pages 366–385, Berlin, Germany. Springer

Berlin Heidelberg.

Jacques Sakarovitch. 2009. Elements of Automata

Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

United Kingdom.

Caitlin Smith and Charlie O’Hara. 2019. Formal Char-

acterizations of True and False Sour Grapes. In

Proceedings of the Society for Computation in Lin-

guistics, volume 2, pages 338–341, Amherst, MA.

ScholarWorks@UMass Amherst.

Arie Spruit. 1986. Abkhaz Studies. PhD Dissertation,

Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands.

Loren Trigo. 1992. Abkhaz Stress Shift. In

Brian George Hewitt, editor, Caucasian Perspec-

tives, pages 191–235. Lincom Europa, Munich, Ger-

many.

https://doi.org/10.1147/rd.91.0047
https://doi.org/10.1147/rd.91.0047
http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.05287
http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.05287
https://doi.org/10.1109/34.211465
https://doi.org/10.1109/34.211465
https://doi.org/10.1145/320924.320930
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139195218
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139195218
https://doi.org/10.7275/vd79-kt51
https://doi.org/10.7275/vd79-kt51

