















































Online aggression from a sociological perspective: An integrative view on determinants and possible countermeasures


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online, pages 181–187
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

181

 

 
 

Abstract 

The present paper introduces a theoretical 
model for explaining aggressive online 
comments from a sociological perspective. 
It is innovative as it combines individual, 
situational, and social-structural 
determinants of online aggression and tries 
to theoretically derive their interplay. 
Moreover, the paper suggests an empirical 
strategy for testing the model. The main 
contribution will be to match online 
commenting data with survey data 
containing rich background data of non-
/aggressive online commentators.  

1 Introduction 

In the past years, online aggression in social media 
has attracted a lot of attention not only in the 
broader public but also in academia (e.g. 
Cicchirillo et al. 2015; Sydnor 2018). Studies show 
that offending, defaming, or threatening online 
comments posted by Internet users fundamentally 
negatively affect the targeted persons’ well-being, 
social harmony, and democratic outcomes (e.g. 
Anderson et al., 2014; Bauman, 2013; Kwon and 
Gruzd, 2017). Accordingly, knowing why people 
aggress online is the first step to counter it. 
Although previous research on online aggression 
has been successful in suggesting and explaining 
single determinants driving aggressive online 
commenting (see studies in the State of Research 
below), (1) their interplay has hardly been studied 
due to the lack of an overarching theoretical 
framework and (2) socio-structural determinants 
have been largely ignored so far. Moreover, from a 
methods point of view, (3) there are no studies that 
systematically link digital commenting data to 
offline information on adult aggressors from the 
wider population. 
Hence, the present paper introduces a theoretical 
model that relates several determinants of online 

aggression to each other in a more general 
framework of sociological explanation. Based on 
the model, we aim to answer the following research 
questions: (1) Which individual determinants, 
situational determinants, and social-structural 
determinants drive online aggression? (2) How do 
various determinants relate to each other when 
producing aggressive online behavior? (3) Are 
there differences in online aggression between 
social-structural groups?  

Answering such questions requires a specific 
empirical strategy. We intend to conduct a large-
scale quantitative survey in German-speaking 
Switzerland, including aggressive and non-
aggressive online commentators. They are drawn 
from a large population of commentators having 
submitted to online commentary sections of a large 
Swiss media organization. We match their survey 
information with their commenting behavior, 
ranging from non-aggressive to frequently 
aggressive (this classification emerges from 
human/automated content analysis).  

We will elaborate on the theoretical model and 
the planned empirical strategy in the following 
sections. First, however, we will describe in more 
detail the current state of online aggression (OA in 
the remainder of the paper) research. 

2 State of research 

In the literature so far, determinants of OA are 
explored primarily from three different 
perspectives: the individual-psychological, the 
situational, and the social-structural. All three 
perspectives are shortly reviewed here, from the 
fields of psychology, political science, and 
communication. 

2.1 Psychological-individual determinants 
From a psychological-individual perspective, 

OA can on the one hand be motivated by relatively 
stable psychological traits (“aggressors as 

Online aggression from a sociological perspective:  
An integrative view on determinants and possible countermeasures 

 
Lea Stahel 

University of Zurich 
Department of Sociology 

Andreasstrasse 15, CH-8003 Zurich 
stahel@soziologie.uzh.ch 

 

Sebastian Weingartner 
University of Zurich 

Department of Sociology 
Andreasstrasse 15, CH-8003 Zurich 

weingartner@soziologie.uzh.ch 
 

 



182

 

 
 

antisocial individuals”).  The underlying theory 
proposes that each individual has a unique 
personality and that associated traits motivate 
behavior and thus (online) aggression. For 
example, online aggressors score relatively higher 
in narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism 
(e.g. Abell and Brewer, 2014), might lack empathy 
(Steffgen et al., 2011), may be less open, low in 
self-control, and impulsive (Peterson and Densley, 
2017), but also more depressive and shy (Bauman, 
2013).  

On the other hand, OA can be motivated by less 
stable individual emotions, beliefs, and goals 
(“aggressors as venting, convinced Internet 
activists”). For example, people in negative mood 
may troll (Cheng et al., 2017), being angry at unfair 
negotiators motivates to digitally aggress (Johnson 
et al., 2009), and car drivers vent their rage 
(Stephens et al., 2016). Also, online aggressors 
belief that they do not get caught and that their 
online con-ent is not permanently stored (Wright, 
2013). Further, people participating in collective 
online outrage are motivated by moral heuristics 
and moral beliefs (e.g. based on moral 
disengagement theory by Faulkner and Bliuc, 
2016) and punishing violators of social norms 
(based on social norm theory; Rost et al., 2016). 
Finally, online aggressors have goals. They spread 
political ideologies, seek thrill and fun, draw 
attention to social in-justice (Erjavec and Kovačič, 
2012), or seek social standing, status, and 
recognition (e.g. Ballard and Welch, 2017). 

2.2 Situational determinants 
Research on situational determinants suggests 

that online aggressive individuals are influenced 
by properties of the digital media environment and 
the surrounding social and situational context 
(“aggressors as ordinary people, but situationally-
driven”). The psychological-communicative 
Reduced cues approach (Sproull and Kiesler, 
1986) argues that properties of online 
environments may cause toxic online disinhibition 
(Suler, 2004): people feel less restraint because of 
the absence of social-context cues, anonymity, 
invisibility, asynchronicity, or minimization of 
authority. This is explained either by 
deindividuation theories (Diener, 1980) or by the 
social identity model of deindividuation effects 
(SIDE) which argues that deindividuation 
triggered by reduced social cues and anonymity in 
online settings boosts the salience of individuals’ 

social identity relative to their personal identity. 
Thus, if a group norm is salient (e.g. in an online 
forum), commentators will conform to it rather 
than engage in uncontrolled aggressive behavior 
(Reicher et al., 1995). SIDE is empirically 
supported in several settings (e.g. Hmielowski et 
al., 2014).  

OA is also explained by social learning theories 
and situational social control. For example, 
perceiving flaming norms socializes people into 
flaming (Cheng et al., 2017). Also, people more 
likely aggress online if informal social controls 
from an effective community policy and peer 
pressure are lacking, predicted by routine activity 
theories of crime (Navarro and Jasinski, 2012), 
deterrence theory (Xu et al., 2016), or social norms 
(Álvarez-Benjumea and Winter, 2018). Similarly, 
people more likely aggress if they have become 
cyber-victims themselves (Quintana-Orts and Rey, 
2018), receive comments challenging their beliefs 
(Hutchens et al., 2015) or threatening their face 
(Masullo Chen and Lu, 2017), or if public actors 
misbehave (Johnen et al., 2017; Rost et al., 2016). 
Finally, legal frameworks, ethical guidelines, and 
moderation strategies set up by online (news) 
platforms may be situationally influential 
(Ksiazek, 2015).  

2.3 Social-structural determinants 
Research on social-structural determinants is 

very scarce. It includes socio-demographics, social 
group memberships, and structural positions and 
relations. Accordingly, OA may differ by cultural 
and national backgrounds (Shapka et al., 2018), 
gender (Ballard and Welch, 2017; Bauman, 2013; 
Shapka et al., 2018), and age (Bauman, 2013; 
Shapka et al., 2018). Also, incivility on Twitter is 
higher in areas of low socioeconomic status (SES), 
low social capital potential (i.e. potential for 
interconnected citizen networks), and low in-
district partisan polarization (Vargo and Hopp, 
2017). Finally, (few) structural and 
sociodemographic factors are considered in the 
social media cyberbullying model (SMCBM) 
model by (Lowry et al., 2016). 

2.4 Gaps 
Reviewing the literature on OA, several gaps 

emerge. Theoretically, there is, first, no 
overarching theoretical framework integrating the 
determinants suggested. Accordingly, theoretical 
approaches to cyberbullying are “sparse and 



183

 

 
 

piecemeal” (Espelage et al., 2012: 49) and „have 
received scant conceptual development” (Runions, 
2013: 751). Hence, a major task of future research 
is to develop “a comprehensive theoretical model 
that might ground the conversation about cyber 
aggression and violence” (Peterson and Densley, 
2017: 197). At best, such a model addresses the 
“interaction between micro, meso, and macro 
levels of explanation” in order to overcome 
research’s current lack of “continuity and 
coherence” (Peterson and Densley, 2017: 197).  

Second, there is a need to relate OA more 
systematically to social-structural factors. Up to 
now, information on aggressors and their 
aggression-benefiting circumstances is limited 
(Coe et al., 2014: 675; Peterson and Densley, 
2017:195). Especially with regard to potential 
“civility divides” (Vargo and Hopp, 2017: 26), 
exploring socio-demographic and socio-economic 
determinants (such as gender, age, education, or 
prestige) enables to empirically test whether “those 
equipped with economic and social privilege in the 
off-line realm may disproportionally gain value 
from online deliberation, while those with 
diminished economic and social resources may 
interact in a hostile, uncivil, (…) strata of the 
Internet” (Vargo and Hopp, 2017: 24; also see 
Cicchirillo et al., 2015). 

Third, there are no studies that systematically 
link digital commenting data to offline information 
in a large sample of adult aggressors. Most studies 
only use natively online data. If offline in-
formation is collected at all, then it is linked to OA 
intentions, self-reports, or experimental triggers, at 
best.  

3 Theoretical model 

Here, we introduce an integrative model that 
relates a multitude of determinants to each other in 
a general framework of sociological explanation, 
also explicitly theorizing social-structural 
determinants. This model builds on the ideas of 
structural individualism (Coleman, 1994) and the 
model of frame-selection (Esser, 2001; Kroneberg, 
2011).  

Basically, structural individualism aims at 
dissecting social phenomena into its constitutive 
parts, that is meaningful decisions of individual 
actors. These decisions, however, are embedded in 
a configuration of social structures and institutions. 
This social context, in turn, affects (if correctly 
perceived) actors’ goals, beliefs, and opportunities, 

which then guide their behavior (Maurer and 
Schmid, 2010; Udehn 2001). From this 
perspective, OA comments are defined as 
individual decisions (actions) which are in a first 
step explained by both characteristics of the 
individual (e.g. beliefs) and situational parameters 
(e.g. others’ behaviors). In a second step, individual 
determinants are related to social-structural 
background. The relationship between these two 
sets of determinants can be thought of in several 
ways: social context conditions may structure the 
set of behavioral alternatives available, the 
behavioral costs, and an individual’s preferences, 
attitudes, and body of knowledge. Theoretically, 
this can be explained by learning theories (Bandura 
1977) or social production function theory (Ormel 
et al. 1999). 

It needs to be specified, then, how individual 
decisions come about. This is important because 
the theory of action chosen has an impact on which 
individual and situational determinants can be 
taken into account. Instead of relying on a rather 
simple rational-choice approach for explaining 
individual decisions, we opt for the more elaborate 
model of frame-selection (MFS) as introduced by 
Kroneberg (2011, 2014). In classical rational-
choice theory (Opp, 1999), it is assumed that actors 
choose those behavioral alternatives which they 
expect to best fulfill their preferences given certain 
behavioral constraints. Thus, behavior is a function 
of individual goals (evaluative beliefs, including 
egoistic just as prosocial goals), beliefs about the 
consequences of decisions, and behavioral 
constraints (the latter two are often summarized as 
descriptive beliefs). However, rational-choice 
theory is silent about which descriptive and 
evaluative beliefs are active in a specific decision 
situation. Therefore, MFS explicitly incorporates 
the process of the definition of the situation (Esser, 
1996). In this process, actors subjectively define 
which kind of situation they are actually facing 
(which may – in contrast to rational-choice theory 
– deviate from “objective” situational 
requirements). They do so by synchronizing given 
situational cues with internalized knowledge about 
typical situations (frames). Hence, descriptive and 
evaluative beliefs guiding behavior are not taken 
for granted but depend on actors’ subjective 
perceptions of the situation. This means that 
behavioral differences between (groups of) actors 
do not simply result from individual or situational 



184

 

 
 

differences, but from interactions between 
individual and situational characteristics.  

Based on these theoretical considerations, we 
propose the following explanatory model of OA 
(Figure 1): 
 

In this model, OA behavior results from 
individuals’ definitions of potential online 
commenting situations. Such definitions represent 
a situation’s general meaning and thus determine 
which individual beliefs are activated and which 
situational constraints are perceived by the actor. 
How situations are defined depends on two sets of 
factors: (1) situational determinants comprise all 
relevant characteristics of the situational context 
and thus are in principle identical for all actors in 
the same situation (but still differently perceived). 
(2) individual determinants comprise all 
descriptive (representations of current states of the 
world) and evaluative beliefs (representations of 
desired states of the world) of an individual and 
thus do not vary across situations for a specific 
actor. The interactive relationship between 
individual and situational determinants can be 
understood in two ways. Straightforwardly, it 
means that those individual beliefs (and 
opportunities) guide behavior which are activated 
by certain situational cues. This differs according 
to the overall set of beliefs internalized by the 
individual. However, if some descriptive or 

evaluative beliefs are strongly internalized and thus 
chronically active, they can prompt a certain 
definition of the situation (and thus action) 
irrespective of the situational conditions given 
(possible misperception). As mentioned above, we 
assume descriptive and evaluative beliefs to be tied 
to social-structural determinants. In accordance 
with structural individualism, sociological factors 
such as socio-economic or demographic attributes 
are reflected in individual determinants. Hence, 
social-structural groups are expected to be similar 
in terms of certain beliefs. Overall, the model 
emphasizes that OA does neither result from 
characteristics of the individual, nor from 
characteristics of the situation, but rather from the 
interplay of these two. 

4 Empirical approach 

The empirical study seeks to collect data on 
individual, situational, and social-structural 
determinants of OA behavior. Therefore, we intend 
to conduct an online survey in German-speaking 
Switzerland with four different groups: frequent 
OA commentators, occasional OA commentators, 
non-OA commentators, and non-commentators. 
Group-differences in determinants, then, allow to 
assess determinants’ relative effect on OA 
behavior. However, sampling OA commentators is 
not easy because it is a relatively rare behavior. 
Thus, we apply an elaborate, two-step sampling 
strategy: First, in order to sample OA and non-OA 
commentators, we use the unique opportunity to 
collaborate with a large Swiss media corporation. 
We will use a large dataset of news comments 
submitted to its website (including meta-data such 
as time of submission). The dataset includes 
moderated comments: comments considered as 
being non-aggressive by moderators (and were 
published in the commentary section) and 
comments considered as aggressive (and were not 
published). By employing human/automated 
content analysis of all comments, we identify the 
following groups and assign all commentators to 
one of them: frequently aggressive commentators, 
occasionally aggressive commentators, and non-
aggressive commentators. From each group, we 
invite around 1500 people to participate in the 
survey. Second, in order to sample persons who do 
not engage in online commenting at all (non-
commentators), we use a random sample of the 
resident population of German-speaking 
Switzerland.  

Individual  
Determinants 

Descriptive beliefs 
Evaluative beliefs  

Social-Structural  
Determinants 

Aggressive Online 
Behavior 

Situational  
Determinants 

Fig 1: Explanatory model of aggressive online behavior. 

Definition of the 
Situation 

(activated beliefs, 
perceived constraints) 



185

 

 
 

Particular attention is given to data protection and 
the ethics of recruiting. First, all the comments and 
meta data received by the Swiss media corporation 
is principally public data, thus principally 
searchable and retrievable. This is because 
commentators submit their comments to news 
platforms in the knowledge that their comments get 
principally published (even in cases where 
comments are ultimately not published by 
moderators). Beyond, this data set is given to us in 
an anonymized form. Thus, privacy concerns can 
be excluded. Second, not the authors but the Swiss 
media corporation invites the commentators to 
participate in the survey (as the e-mail addresses of 
commentators are only available to the corporation 
but not to us). Third, by forming groups of 
commentators (see above) whereby individuals in 
each group receive group-specific online surveys, 
the survey data of individuals will only be 
connected to the affiliation to these groups but at 
no time to individual comments or commentators. 
This makes it impossible to identify single 
individuals in the resulting data set. Fourth, an 
ethics approval will be sought in the process of 
designing the survey. 
Our approach of matching online data with survey 
data allows to combine behavioral data with a 
broad range of – so far scarcely collected – 
individual, social-structural, and situational 
determinants of OA. While individual and social-
structural determinants will mainly be measured in 
the survey, most situational determinants will be 
measured through aggregating user-generated 
comments and meta-data.  

5 Conclusion 

The preceding paper introduced a novel, 
sociologically informed theoretical framework 
integrating a broad set of determinants of 
aggressive online commenting behavior. 
Furthermore, it suggested an empirical strategy 
allowing to disentangle the effects single 
determinants by matching online data with survey 
data.  
 

References  
Abell, L., Brewer, G., 2014. Machiavellianism, self-

monitoring, self-promotion and relational 
aggression on Facebook. Computers in Human 
Behavior 36, 258–262. 

Álvarez-Benjumea, A., Winter, F., 2018. Normative 
Change and Culture of Hate: An Experiment in 
Online Environments. European Sociological 
Review 29, 1–15.  

Anderson, A.A., Brossard, D., Scheufele, D.A., Xenos, 
M.A., Ladwig, P., 2014. The “nasty effect: ” Online 
incivility and risk perceptions of emerging 
technologies. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication 19 (3), 373–387. 

Ballard, M.E., Welch, K.M., 2017. Virtual warfare: 
Cyberbullying and cyber-victimization in MMOG 
play. Games and Culture 12 (5), 466–491.  

Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. 
Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Bauman, S., 2013. Cyberbullying: What does research 
tell us? Theory into practice 52 (4), 249–256. 

Cheng, J., Bernstein, M., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, 
C., Leskovec, J., 2017. Anyone can become a troll: 
Causes of trolling behavior in online discussions. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.01119. 

Cicchirillo, V., Hmielowski, J., Hutchens, M., 2015. 
The mainstreaming of verbally aggressive online 
political behaviors. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, 
and Social Networking 18 (5), 253–259. 

Coe, K., Kenski, K., Rains, S.A., 2014. Online and 
uncivil?: Patterns and determinants of incivility in 
newspaper website comments. Journal of 
Communication 64 (4), 658–679. 

Coleman, J.S., 1994. Foundations of social theory. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge. 

Diener, E., 1980. Deindividuation: The absence of self-
awareness and self-regulation in group members. 
The psychology of group influence 209242. 

Erjavec, K., Kovačič, M.P., 2012. “You Don't 
Understand, This is a New War!: ” Analysis of Hate 
Speech in News Web Sites' Comments. Mass 
Communication and Society 15 (6), 899–920. 

Espelage, D.L., Rao, M.A., Craven, R.G., 2012. 
Theories of cyberbullying. Principles of 
cyberbullying research: Definitions, measures, and 
methodology, 49–67. 

Esser, H., 2001. Soziologie. Spezielle Grundlagen. 
Band 6: Sinn und Kultur. Campus, Frankfurt a. M. 

Esser, H., 1996. Die Definition der Situation. Kölner 
Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 48 
(1), 1–34. 

Faulkner, N., Bliuc, A.-M., 2016. ‘It’s okay to be 
racist’: moral disengagement in online discussions 
of racist incidents in Australia. Ethnic and Racial 
Studies 39 (14), 2545–2563. 



186

 

 
 

Hmielowski, J.D., Hutchens, M.J., Cicchirillo, V.J., 
2014. Living in an age of online incivility: 
Examining the conditional indi-rect effects of 
online discussion on political flaming. Information, 
Communication & Society 17 (10), 1196–1211. 

Hutchens, M.J., Cicchirillo, V.J., Hmielowski, J.D., 
2015. How could you think that?: !?!: 
Understanding intentions to engage in political 
flaming. New Media & Society 17 (8), 1201–1219. 

Johnen, M., Jungblut, M., Ziegele, M., 2017. The 
digital outcry: What incites participation behavior 
in an online firestorm? New Media & Society, 
1461444817741883. 

Johnson, N.A., Cooper, R.B., Chin, W.W., 2009. Anger 
and flaming in computer-mediated negotiation 
among strangers. Decision Support Systems 46 (3), 
660–672. 

Kroneberg, C., 2011. Die Erklärung sozialen 
Handelns: Grundlagen und Anwendung einer 
integrativen Theorie. VS-Verlag, Wiesbaden. 

Ksiazek, T.B., 2015. Civil interactivity: How news 
organizations' commenting policies explain civility 
and hostility in user comments. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media 59 (4), 556–573. 

Kwon, K.H., Gruzd, A., 2017. Is aggression contagious 
online?: a case of swearing on donald trump’s 
campaign videos on youtube. Proceedings of the 
50th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 2165–2174. 

Lowry, P.B., Zhang, J., Wang, C., Siponen, M., 2016. 
Why do adults engage in cyberbullying on social 
media?: An integration of online disinhibition and 
deindividuation effects with the social structure and 
social learning model. Information Systems 
Research 27 (4), 962–986. 

Masullo Chen, G., Lu, S., 2017. Online political 
discourse: Exploring differences in effects of civil 
and uncivil disagreement in news website 
comments. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media 61 (1), 108–125. 

Maurer, A., Schmid, M., 2010. Erklärende Soziologie: 
Grundlagen, Vertreter und Anwendungsfelder eines 
soziologischen Forschungsprogramms. VS-Verlag, 
Wiesbaden. 

Navarro, J.N., Jasinski, J.L., 2012. Going cyber: Using 
routine activities theory to predict cyberbullying 
experiences. Sociological Spectrum 32 (1), 81–94. 

Opp, K.-D., 1999. Contending conceptions of the 
theory of rational action. Journal of Theoretical 
Politics 11 (2), 171–202.  

Ormel, J., S. Lindenberg, N. Steverink, et al. (1999). 
Subjective well-being and social production 

functions. Social Indicators Research 46(1): 613–
90. 

Peterson, J., Densley, J., 2017. Cyber violence: What 
do we know and where do we go from here? 
Aggression and violent behavior 34, 193–200. 

Quintana-Orts, C., Rey, L., 2018. Forgiveness and 
cyberbullying in adolescence: Does willingness to 
forgive help minimize the risk of becoming a 
cyberbully? Computers in Human Behavior 81, 
209–214. 

Reicher, S.D., Spears, R., Postmes, T., 1995. A social 
identity model of deindividuation phenomena. 
European review of social psychology 6 (1), 161–
198. 

Rost, K., Stahel, L., Frey, B.S., 2016. Digital social 
norm enforcement: Online firestorms in social 
media. PLoS One 11 (6), e0155923. 

Runions, K.C., 2013. Toward a conceptual model of 
motive and self-control in cyber-aggression: Rage, 
revenge, reward, and recreation. Journal of youth 
and adolescence 42 (5), 751–771. 

Shapka, J.D., Onditi, H.Z., Collie, R.J., Lapidot-Lefler, 
N., 2018. Cyberbullying and Cybervictimization 
Within a Cross-Cultural Context: A Study of 
Canadian and Tanzanian Adolescents. Child 
development 89 (1), 89–99. 

Sproull, L., Kiesler, S., 1986. Reducing social context 
cues: Electronic mail in organizational 
communication. Management science 32 (11), 
1492–1512. 

Steffgen, G., König, A., Pfetsch, J., Melzer, A., 2011. 
Are cyberbullies less empathic?: Adolescents' 
cyberbullying behavior and empathic 
responsiveness. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and 
Social Networking 14 (11), 643–648. 

Stephens, A.N., Trawley, S.L., Ohtsuka, K., 2016. 
Venting anger in cyberspace: Self-entitlement 
versus self-preservation in# roadrage tweets. 
Transportation research part F: traffic psychology 
and behaviour 42, 400–410. 

Suler, J., 2004. The online disinhibition effect. 
Cyberpsychology & behavior 7 (3), 321–326. 

Sydnor, E. (2018). Platforms for incivility: Examining 
perceptions across different media formats. 
Political Communication 35(1): 97–116. 

Udehn, L. (2001). Methodological individualism: 
Background, history and meaning. London: 
Routledge. 

Vargo, C.J., Hopp, T., 2017. Socioeconomic status, 
social capital, and partisan polarity as predictors of 
political incivility on Twitter: a congressional 



187

 

 
 

district-level analysis. Social Science Computer 
Review 35 (1), 10–32. 

Wright, M.F., 2013. The relationship between young 
adults' beliefs about anonymity and subsequent 
cyber aggression. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and 
Social Networking 16 (12), 858–862. 

Xu, B., Xu, Z., Li, D., 2016. Internet aggression in 
online communities: a contemporary deterrence 
perspective. Information Systems Journal 26 (6), 
641–667. 

 


