















































Understanding the Evolution of Circular Economy through Language Change


Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Computational Approaches to Historical Language Change, pages 250–253
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

250

1 
	

1 Introduction 

Drawing on the work of Thomas Kuhn, 
philosophers of science have developed 
understandings of the process of scientific 
development (Campbell, 1974b; Popper, 1972; 
Toulmin, 1967, 1972; Hull, 1988) using 
metaphors relating to Darwin’s theory of natural 
selection. The consequence of this is the 
conceptualization of scientific development as 
constituting an “evolutionary process”. The 
defining feature of adopting an evolutionary 
orientation in understanding scientific 
development is suggesting an analogy between 
the process of biological evolutionary process 
and that of gain in knowledge (Bradie, 1986). 
According to this perspective, in the course of 
evolution, species become more adaptive to their 
natural environment by undergoing natural 
selection. Likewise, scientific progress is a result 
of selection mechanisms on an individual level 
and in the scientific community.  

Scientists are the “central subjects” in the 
process of scientific development since they are 
the entities who read the literature, perform 
experiments, publish the results and pass 
on knowledge. Textbooks, journal articles are 
“vehicles” in this process of scientific and 
conceptual development. Scientists then go on to 
form communities based on common cognitive, 
social and philosophical grounds (Hull, 1988).  

While the production of scientific knowledge is 
an outcome of selectionist mechanisms, it is 
closely related to evolution of human language 

(Popper, 1984; Bradie, 1986). 
Scientific communities tend to use the same 
umbrella terms (“lexicon kind-terms”) at the 
least, having meanings that are shared and 
understood by members of such communities. 
Language thus becomes a crucial indicator to 
assess the shift or development in ideas (Kuhn, 
1990). 

For our study, we propose to focus on a specific 
concept—that of Circular Economy (CE). The 
evolutionary perspective of understanding 
scientific development is the framework that we 
implement to understand this concept. While this 
forms a part of our larger ongoing work to 
determine the process of emergence, diffusion 
and evolution of the concept of ‘circular 
economy’ in academic discourse, the focus of 
this study is to understand the evolution of CE 
from the lens of language change, as language 
can be a crucial indicator of the shift in ideas in a 
particular scientific field.  

There are two aspects of language change that 
can be investigated. The first one is lexical 
change, i.e., the generational shift in the 
representation of words over time, and the 
second is semantic change, i.e., the evolution of 
word usage, sometimes to the point that the 
modern meaning is radically different. In some 
cases, the semantic change that words undergo 
happens by means of acquiring additional 
meanings, rather than original meanings 
becoming outdated or being replaced. In this 
study we will be analysing how the language 
used in academic discussions pertaining to CE 
has changed semantically. It is worth noting that 

Understanding the Evolution of Circular Economy  
through Language Change 

 
 
 

Sampriti Mahanty1, Frank Boons2, Julia Handl3, Riza Theresa Batista-Navarro4 
Alliance Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester1, 2,3 

School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester4 
sampriti.mahanty@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk1 

{frank.boons, julia.handl, riza.batista}@manchester.ac.uk2,3,4 
 
 
 
 
 
 



251

2 
	

the meaning and central theme of this concept 
has remained the same; however, we hypothesise 
that it has undergone semantic change by way of 
additional layers being added to the concept. 

2 Circular Economy 

Circular Economy (CE) refers to a system of 
provision in which resources are circulated 
between production and consumption rather than 
linearly transformed from production to 
consumption to waste. It has gained immense 
traction amongst academics, practitioners and 
policy-makers for its perceived capacity to 
operationalise Sustainable Development1: 
(Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). It is only in the last 
15 years that it has emerged as a field in its own 
right, being referred to directly and 
independently in the academic literature, 
distancing itself from the antecedent fields (e.g., 
industrial ecology) (Prendeville et al., 2018).  

The diffusion of CE has become prominent since 
2015 as indicated by the steep increase in the 
number of academic articles published 
(Appendix Figure 1). This can be attributed to 
the fact that more recently, CE has gained 
dominance in literature discussing issues related 
to sustainability. While CE has its roots in 
Industrial Ecology focused on industrial 
processes, pollution etc., nowadays CE is 
actively being referred to in the context of 
micro-level interventions for sustainable 
development, e.g., circular product design, 
circular business models (Bocken et al., 2016). 
The contemporary understanding of CE and its 
practical applications to industrial processes and 
economic systems has evolved to incorporate 
different features and contributions from 
concepts beyond CE which share the theme of 
closed loops (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). This 
kind of change in context makes CE suitable as 
the focus of our study in scientific concept 
evolution. 

3 Methodology and Findings 

The first step towards the analysis of language 
for detecting semantic change w.r.t CE is the 
collection of academic literature on CE from the 

																																																													
1 Development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising on the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs 

Scopus database2. Using the query “circular 
economy”, we retrieved a total of 3,300 
scientific papers. For the pre-processing of the 
corpora, we performed word stemming and the 
removal of stop-words, extraneous white spaces 
and punctuations. We conducted topic modelling 
using the Latent Dirichlet Allocation algorithm 
(Blei et al., 2003) on the academic abstracts by 
using the topic models3 package available in R. 
The number of topics (K) was fixed at 20, based 
on the examination of coherence scores4 of the 
topic model coupled with manual analysis. The 
results from the topic model were plotted to 
visualize the topics over time. Based on the 
results from the topic model we noticed a 
structural change in academic discussions 
pertaining to CE in the year 2015 (Appendix 
Figure 2). There was a significant change in the 
proportion of topic distribution before and after 
2015. Based on this finding, two datasets were 
formed: an early set consisting of papers 
published from 2006 to 2014, and a 
contemporary CE set composed of papers 
published from 2015 to March 2019.  

We investigated and compared the CE literature 
across the early and contemporary data sets 
using two approaches to analyse semantic 
change in language over time. First is the 
development of co-occurrence networks based 
on keywords associated with the documents. 
Nodes of the network correspond to the 
keywords (with a node for CE as the centroid), 
and edges indicate the co-occurrences. A co-
occurrence network using the bibliometrix 
package5 in R was generated based on each of 
the early (Figure 1) and contemporary (Figure 2) 
data sets. We observed that there is a significant 
difference between the two co-occurrence 
networks. Contemporary CE literature was found 
to be more strongly linked to “business models”, 
“supply chain”, “product design”. Meanwhile the 
focus of early CE literature was more on 
“ecology”, “industrial economics” and 

																																																													
2 https://www.scopus.com/search/form.uri?display=basic 
 
3 https://cran.r-
project.org/web/packages/topicmodels/topicmodels.pdf 
 
4 The coherence score is for assessing the quality of the 
learned topics. For one topic, the words i, j being scored in 
∑i<jScore (wi, wj) have the highest probability of occurring 
for that topic. 

5 http://bibliometrix.org	



252

3 
	

“environmental management”. These 
observations confirm that the concept of CE has 
undergone some change over the years that are 
reflected by a shift in focus in the context of its 
application (as discussed in Section 2). We note 
that despite this expansion, the core meaning of 
the concept has not changed over time (as 
evidenced by the nodes that are common 
between the two networks, e.g., “sustainable 
development, “waste management”, “recycling”. 

 

Figure 1: Co-occurrence network drawn from the 
early dataset (2006-2014) 

 

 

Figure 2: Co-occurrence network drawn from the 
contemporary dataset (2015-2019) 

Our second method is underpinned by the 
development of word embedding vectors 
(Bojanowski et al., 2017).  We obtained word 
embeddings using gensim’s word2vec6 
implementation on the full text of academic 
articles. The word embeddings were trained on 
each of the two data sets i.e., early and 
contemporary CE literature. We then compared 
the word embeddings based on the target word of 
interest “circular economy” across the two time 
periods. The cosine similarity between word 
embedding vectors across the two time frames is 
only 0.195. To better understand the similarity 
measure between the word embeddings we 
conduct a random sampling on each of the early 
																																																													
6https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/models/word2vec.html 

and contemporary datasets to create two subsets 
out of each, then trained embeddings on each of 
the subsets. The cosine similarity between each of 
the subsets came across to be quite high i.e., 0.62 
and 0.743 in the early and contemporary dataset 
respectively. This provides us with the basis of 
comparing the cosine similarities and we can 
conclude that the cosine similarity of word 
vectors between the late and early dataset is 
considerably low at 0.195. 
 
If we examine the nearest neighbours of CE (i.e., 
words with highest similarity to CE) from the two 
time periods in Table 1, we see a shift from the 
environmental and industrial focus to a 
perspective, which integrates an approach, which 
is innovation, business focused and incorporates 
the social dimension of CE as well. The results 
from the word embeddings conform to the results 
from the co-occurrence networks. The early 
literature primarily address macro-level themes in 
the context of environmental management and 
industries while the contemporary literature 
focuses on more micro- level interventions like 
business models, product design and supply 
chain.  

 
Early dataset Contemporary dataset 

Resource 
Materials 
Recycling 

China 
Environmental 

Economic 
Industrial 

Innovation 
Business Models 

Social 
Strategies 

Companies 
Supply Chain 
Sustainable 

development 

Table 1: Closely associated word vectors to CE for 
each of the early and contemporary datasets, ordered 
by decreasing similarity.  

3. Conclusion 

We have discussed that semantic change in 
language is a reflection of shifts in scientific 
ideas, which in turn help explain the evolution of 
a concept. This helps us to build an 
understanding of conceptual evolution. This 
forms a part of our ongoing work to understand 
the concept of CE starting from the emergence 
of the concept, to its adaption, diffusion and 
evolution.  

 



253

4 
	

 
References  
 
Bocken Nancy, Pauw Ingrid de, Bakker Conny & 

Grinten Bram van der. (2016). Product design and 
business model strategies for a circular 
economy, Journal of Industrial and Production 
Engineering, 33:5, 308-
320, DOI: 10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124 

Bojanowski, Piotr, Grave Edouard, Joulin Armand, 
and Mikolov Tomas (2017). Enriching word 
vectors with subword information. Transactions of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics: 
135-146. 

Blei, D.M.; Jordan, M.I.; Ng, A.Y. (2003) 
Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine 
Learning. Res. 2003, 3, 993–1022.  

Bradie, Michael. "Assessing evolutionary 
epistemology. (1986)" Biology and Philosophy 1.4: 
401-459. 

Campbell, Donald. T. (1974b). “Evolutionary 
Epistemology”. In: Schlipp, P. A. (Ed.), The 
philosophy of Karl Popper. LaSalle, IL: Open 
Court, 413–63.  

Geissdoerfer, Martin & Savaget, Paulo & Bocken, 
Nancy & Hultink, Erik. (2017). The Circular 
Economy – A new sustainability paradigm? 
Journal of Cleaner Production. 143. 757–768. 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048. 

Hull, David L. (1988). Science as a Process an 
Evolutionary Account of the Social and Conceptual 
Development of Science.  University Of Chicago 
Press. 

Kuhn, Thomas S. (1990). The Road since Structure. 
_PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the 
Philosophy of Science Association_ 1990:3-13. 

Popper, Karl. R. (1972) (1979). Objective Knowledge: 
An Evolutionary Approach, Oxford: The Clarendon 
Press 

Popper, Karl R, and William Warren Bartley. (1984) 
"Postscript to the logic of scientific discovery."  

Prendeville, Sharon, Emma Cherim, and Nancy 
Bocken. (2018). Circular cities: mapping six cities 
in transition. Environmental innovation and 
societal transitions. 26 171-194. 

Toulmin, Stephen. (1967). “The Evolutionary 
Development of Natural Science”, American 
Scientist 55, 456–471 

Toulmin, Stephen. (1972). Human Understanding: 
The Evolution of Collective Understanding, 
Volume 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.   

 

Appendices 

 

 

Figure 1: Production of academic articles on CE 

 

Figure 2: Proportion of topic distribution over time 

 

 

 


