




































On reducing translation shifts in translations intended for MT evaluation

Maja Popović
ADAPT Centre

Dublin City University
Ireland

maja.popovic@adaptcentre.ie

Abstract

Automatic evaluation of machine transla-
tion (MT) is based on the idea that the
quality of the MT output is better if it is
more similar to human translation (HT).
Whereas automatic metrics based on this
similarity idea enable fast and large-scale
evaluation of MT progress and therefore
are widely used, they have certain lim-
itations. One is the fact that the auto-
matic metrics are not able to recognise ac-
ceptable differences between MT and HT.
The frequent cause of these differences
are translation shifts, the optional depar-
tures from theoretical formal correspon-
dence between source and target language
units for the sake of adapting the text to
the norms and conventions of the target
language. This work is based on the au-
thor’s own translation experience related to
the evaluation of MT output compared to
the experience unrelated to MT. The main
observation is that, although without any
instructions in this direction, fewer trans-
lation shifts were performed than when
translating for other purposes. This find-
ing will hopefully initialise further system-
atic research both from the aspect of MT as
well as from the aspect of translation stud-
ies (TS) and bring translation theory and
MT closer together.

1 Introduction and Motivation

The notion of translation shifts (Catford, 1965; van
Leuven-Zwart, 1989; van Leuven-Zwart, 1990;
c© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative

Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

Curys, 2006) is an important concept in trans-
lation theory. A shift has ocurred if the trans-
lation procedure has been “oblique” instead of
“direct/literal” (Vinay and Darbelnet, 1958) so
that there are “departures from formal correspon-
dence” (Catford, 1965). A translated text in a tar-
get language can differ from the original text in the
source language in many aspects and levels (such
as lexical, structural, discourse, etc.) and still be
perfectly acceptable. Apart from the transforma-
tions necessary for the sake of grammatical well-
formedness, it is common practice to introduce op-
tional changes to adapt the text to the norms and
conventions of the target language depending on
the genre, domain, register, etc. Although such
changes are not strictly necessary, the professional
translators are expected to deliver texts which ap-
pear natural in the target language.

These shifts, although natural and necessary in
human translation (HT), pose challenges if the
translations are used for automatic evaluation of
machine translation (MT) systems. The vast ma-
jority of MT automatic evaluation metrics is based
on similarity between MT and HT, and availability
of a heterogeneous set of human reference trans-
lations is largely beneficial for metrics’ perfor-
mance (Albrecht and Hwa, 2008; Popović et al.,
2016b). In practice, however, only one reference
HT is available and its characteristics can strongly
affect the results of automatic evaluation.

A lot of work has been done exploring differ-
ences between different types of texts, such as
between texts originally written in a given lan-
guage and texts translated into a given language
(“translationese”) (Baroni and Bernardini, 2006;
Rabinovich and Wintner, 2015; Wintner, 2016;
Daems et al., 2017), human and machine transla-
tions (Ahrenberg, 2017), as well as post-edited MT

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 80



outputs (PEs) as a special case of HT (Čulo and
Nitzke, 2016; Daems et al., 2017; Farrell, 2018).
Overall, the main findings are that HTs differ from
original language texts because the source lan-
guage seems to always “leave a trace” in the trans-
lation (“shine through”); similarly, PE, although
generally capable of reaching the same quality as
HT, always carries a “trace” of the used MT sys-
tem.

Less work can be found about relations between
these facts and the evaluation of machine transla-
tion. Popović et al. (2016b) compared the use of
PEs and HTs, and suggest that PEs should be used
carefully for MT evaluation due to the bias of each
PE towards its MT system caused by the previ-
ously mentioned system’s “shining through”. Two
methods for reducing translation shifts in reference
HTs in order to alleviate automatic MT evaluation
are proposed by Ahrenberg (2006) and Fomicheva
et al. (2015). Ahrenberg (2006) proposes a method
to identify “simpler” HTs which have certain de-
sirable properties and are not too complex for MT
systems. Fomicheva et al. (2015) investigate rule-
based paraphrasing methods to reduce shifts in
HTs and generate additional reference translations.
Nevertheless, there is still a lot of room for system-
atic and extensive experiments dealing with differ-
ent HTs and their relation to the MT evaluation.
For example, even though a large number of HTs
intended for MT evaluation have been generated
in the framework of the WMT shared tasks1 (Bo-
jar et al., 2018; Bojar et al., 2017) running since
2006 until the present, no information can be found
about the translators, such as how many segments
did each individual translate, what are their qualifi-
cations, what translation experience or credentials
do they have, how are they linked to the domain(s)
of the data sets, whether they were aware of the
purpose of their work and whether it had any influ-
ence.

This work reports the first qualitative feedback
related to this topic. The work is based on the
author’s translation experience related to the eval-
uation of MT output compared to the experience
unrelated to MT. The MT-related experience cov-
ers both translation as well as post-editing of MT
output in order to provide reference human trans-
lations for automatic MT evaluation and/or error
analysis. The main observation is that the transla-

1http://statmt.org/wmt19/, http://www.
statmt.org/wmt18/,etc.

tion shifts tend to be diminished when translating
for MT evaluation purposes thus producing less
creative and more literal translations.

This finding will hopefully become an attractive
direction for future work both for MT as well as for
translation studies (TS) and hopefully eventually
contribute to bringing translation theory and MT
closer together.

2 Translator’s Background and
Experience

The author’s educational background is technical
and not related to translation studies. Nevertheless,
she has been interested in languages and transla-
tion since childhood (probably as a result of being
raised by a translator mother), and has been trans-
lating on a more or less regular basis.

Her experience unrelated to MT involves mainly
translation of scientific technical texts, as well as
correspondences and short summaries of literary
texts, between Serbian (native language) and En-
glish or French (professional proficiency). It also
includes translation between German and English
(professional proficiency) of lecture scripts about
Machine Learning, Pattern Recognition and Signal
Processing for courses held at the RWTH Aachen
University.

The author has extensive experience in human
and automatic MT evaluation and error analysis,
including assigning adequacy and/or fluency (re-
lated) scores, error annotation on different lev-
els of granularity, developing automatic evaluation
metrics, developing automatic error classification
tools, as well as comparing automatic metrics and
tools with the corresponding results of human eval-
uation and annotation.

Her translation and post-editing (PE) experience
related to MT evaluation involves mostly the Ser-
bian language (native proficiency) as well as Croa-
tian (near-native proficiency) as target languages,
and English, Spanish, German (professional pro-
ficiency) and Slovenian (advanced passive compe-
tence) as source languages. The translated/post-
edited texts include movie subtitles, user reviews
(mainly about movies), and news.

For all these tasks, the goal of the work was
clear, however no external instructions were speci-
fied (such as minimal post-editing or keeping max-
imal similarity to the source text), but were in-
dependently defined by the author. For example,
the PE2rr corpus (Popović and Arčan, 2016) con-

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 81



tains post-edited MT outputs together with error
annotations and was created mainly in order to
enable assessment of automatic error classifica-
tion tools. Some parts of this corpus (English-to-
Serbian and German-to-Serbian MT outputs) were
post-edited by the author, who decided to perform
relatively light post-editing without taking into ac-
count preferences concerning style, lexical choice,
grammatical structure, etc. The reasoning behind
this decision was that state-of-the-art automatic er-
ror classification tools are certainly not able to dis-
tinguish such subtle error categories. On the other
hand, some other parts of this corpus were taken
from the TaraXÜ corpus (Avramidis et al., 2014)
which was developed independetly and post-edited
by other translators without stating any particular
goal. Many of these PEs contain much more sub-
stantial changes, including separating one sentence
into two or joining two sentences. The same PE
guidelines were applied for identifying the main
problems for MT between the closely related Croa-
tian, Serbian and Slovenian languages (Popović et
al., 2016a), where the PEs are used as reference
translations. The author has also generated refer-
ence HTs for the IMDb corpus in order to enable
fast development of the first English-to-Serbian
MT system for IMDb reviews through the use of
automatic evaluation metrics (Lohar et al., 2019).
During this translation process, the author noticed
that a number of translations could feel much more
natural if they diverged from the close (literal)
translations, however she abstained from introduc-
ing these shifts knowing that the final goal of the
translation was evaluating an MT system.

An important fact is that none of the MT eval-
uations included comparison between MT quality
and HT quality in order to estimate the remaining
gap (Toral and Way, 2018), or to claim “human
parity” (Hassan et al., 2018) (reassessed by Toral
et al. (2018)) “cracking NMT”2 or similar.

3 Observations on translation shifts

The main observation about both translation and
post-editing processes is a tendency towards a bal-
ance between two antagonised aspects: maximal
similarity between source and translated texts and
naturalness of the generated text in the target lan-
guage. On the one hand, paraphrasing the close
version and shifting away from the source is nor-

2https://www.sdl.com/blog/sdl-cracks-russian-neural-
machine-translation.html

mal and natural, and the most common in prac-
tice. On the other hand, keeping the close version
would ensure more reliable MT evaluation results,
as suggested in (Ahrenberg, 2006; Fomicheva et
al., 2015). Using a close HT version as a reference
enables better and easier identification of potential
drawbacks of the system related to the mandatory
changes due to systemic differences between the
languages. Therefore the author performed less
paraphrasing and fewer shifts than usual (when the
purpose of translation was not related to MT eval-
uation). The generated translations were thus often
stylistically flawed but grammatically correct and
accurate.

The observed divergences between the origi-
nal texts and translations can be divided in three
groups. First group of divergences was completely
avoided:

• merging or splitting original sentences
Sentences within a paragraph could be some-
times organised differently than in the source
language text (merging two sentences, split-
ting one sentence into two, or even reorgan-
ising some parts); taking into account that
state-of-the-art3 MT systems as well as au-
tomatic evaluation metrics work only on the
sentence (segment, line) level, such changes
would heavily affect the MT evaluation.

• adding extra information on a sentence level
Although in some cases adding extra informa-
tion to a traslated sentence contributes to the
naturalness of the generated text, the trans-
lator abstained from it because it is difficult
for the MT systems to generate such content
properly.

The second group of shifts was applied, how-
ever less frequently than usual. These shifts were
mainly introduced when a closer version, although
grammatically correct, would require awkward
constructions. Some of these shifts were applied
more frequently than others, and the following list
is roughly ranked according to the increasing fre-
quency:

• changing passive voice into active voice
The passive voice (which is very frequently
used in English, for example “the criminal

3Some of the on-going MT research attempts to go beyond
the sentence level.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 82



was arrested by the police”) was kept in the
translated text whenever possible.

• replacing a pronoun with the corresponding
noun

This shift is to some extent similar to the max-
imally avoided “adding extra information”.
Nevertheless, in some cases the usage of a
pronoun instead of the noun can lead to un-
grammatical sentences, so this type of diver-
gence was introduced in such cases (this can
happen with the English pronoun “it” which
can be rather ambiguous and often cannot be
translated directly).

• changing negation structure
Different languages have different negation
rules, and preservation of the source language
structure is not always possible. However,
possible stylistic changes were avoided (for
example, “it is not necessary” can be replaced
by “it is unnecessary”).

• choosing a less common lexical option
The usage of less frequent synonyms can add
subtlety to the translated text and improve
its naturalness. However, the author chose a
more common option in the majority of such
cases.

• changing phrase order
Whenever possible, the order of phrases in the
source text was preserved in the translation
(this happens often in free-word-order target
languages).

The third group of shifts was not avoided:

• omitting/using pronoun in pro-drop target
languages

Pro-drop languages do not always require a
personal pronoun because this information is
encoded in the verb morphology. When trans-
lating into a pro-drop language, the pronouns
were always used naturally, independently of
the pronouns in the source language.

• changing verb tense, aspect or mood
Different languages can have different usage
of verb tense, aspect and mood. The verbs
were always used naturally in the translations,
independently of the source language.

4 Discussion and future research
directions

The reported translator’s qualitative feedback in-
dicates that the HTs specifically dedicated to the
MT evaluation might have different properties than
HTs generated for other purposes, similarly to dif-
ferences between other types of texts (HTs and
original texts, PEs and HTs). These differences
may be reflected by different types and amounts of
introduced translation shifts.

The reported observations open a number of
questions and directions for future work. Having
been written by an author who is mainly involved
in MT evaluation, it is possible that some impor-
tant points from TS have been missed in this pa-
per. Nevertheless, the main goal of this work is to
give an account of a potential common ground of
translation procedures and MT, as well as to ini-
tialise further research on the topic, both from the
MT evaluation point of view as well as from the
aspect of TS.

4.1 Systematic analysis of translation shifts

First of all, it would be interesting to see the re-
sults of a systematic quantitative analysis, such as
extracting statistics of different shifts in different
HTs. The potential of automatic differentiation be-
tween HTs could be investigated, too.

Furthermore, several parameters should be
taken into account in the future. One factor is the
language pair (and translation direction), because
each language pair involves distinct sets of manda-
tory and optional shifts. Another important factor
which can have influence on the amount of per-
formed/avoided translation divergences is trans-
lators’ background, including his/her attitude to-
wards MT. Last but not least, the primary goal of
the intended MT evaluation has to be clear and
well defined. For the evaluation tasks described
here, where the goals of the evaluation were to es-
timate the MT system’s ability to generate accu-
rate and well-formed text and/or to estimate the
progress during development of an MT system,
HTs with a reduced number of translation shifts
are definitely more convenient. On the other hand,
if a high quality of MT output is desired, evaluat-
ing on natural HTs with a rich lexical variety and a
number of translation shifts is a better option. And
if the aim of the evaluation is to explore the re-
maining gap between MT and HT, the used HTs
should definitely be completely natural, containing

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 83



a number of shifts, having a large lexical variety,
and should originate from demanding genres and
domains. Ideally, these HTs should be free from
any influence of MT. An objective and informative
analysis in this direction was carried out on literary
texts (Toral and Way, 2018).

4.2 Bringing together translation procedures
and MT

In the process of translating, translators transform
one linguistic system which is given (in the source
language) to another which they partially can adapt
to their preferences (in the target language). This
transformation can be performed using different
translation procedures, ranging from direct word-
to-word mapping to complex adaptations. Broadly
speaking, translators can choose one of the two
methods, namely literal (direct) translation (stay-
ing as faithful as possible to the source) and
oblique (complex) translation (adapt the source
language text to the target language) (Vinay and
Darbelnet, 1958). This has also been referred to
as literal in contrast to natural translation (New-
mark, 1988), or, for literary texts translated into
English, domesticating the text (bringing the text
to the reader in the target language), in contrast to
foreignizing the text (bringing the reader to the text
similar to the source language) (Venuti, 2001).

The question of which kind of translating pro-
cedure is better has been the focus of a discussion
for a very long time. Vinay and Darbelnet (1958)
claim that the literalness should be preserved as
much as possible and the oblique translation meth-
ods should only be used with good reason and
within strictly defined limits. A similar position
is presented by Newmark (1988), stating that the
only valid argument against an acceptable literal
translation is if it seems unnatural or clumsy in the
target language. Venuti (2001) argues that “for-
eignising” (literal translation) is appropriate for lit-
erary translation in order to maximally preserve
the original linguistic effect, whereas “domesticat-
ing” should be implemented in technical transla-
tion in order to ensure immediate intelligibility.

With the emergence of MT technologies, the
(positive and negative aspects of) literality might
be revisited including the additional MT point of
view. Several general strategies for approaching
MT from the perspectives of TS were proposed
by Čulo (2014), although connecting translation
procedures and MT has not been mentioned. A

step in this direction is described in (Jones and
Irvine, 2013), where the authors investigate poten-
tials and limits of statistical MT to perform lit-
eral vs. oblique translation. Exploring the new
state-of-the-art MT approach, namely neural ma-
chine translation (NMT), in this sense would be a
very interesting line of research, especially taking
into account the general ability of NMT systems
to produce fluent translations. It can be supposed
that some of the free/flexible/oblique translations
would be easier for an (N)MT system to generate
than some others. A systematic analysis of trans-
lation shifts, possibly including different types of
text (for example scientific and literary) and more
than one NMT system, would certainly bring inter-
esting insights.

Another line of future work is adding the MT
evaluation aspect into the debate about literal vs.
oblique translation. While this discussion may ap-
pear rather philosophical at first sight, it is con-
nected with some important practical aspects, such
as the previously mentioned final goal of the in-
tended MT evaluation (obtaining an overall nu-
meric score, ranking two or more MT outputs,
analysis of grammatical errors, analysis of lexi-
cal and/or stylistic errors, comparing MT with HT,
etc.).

Furthermore, MT evaluation can be interpreted
as the purpose of the translated text in the frame-
work of Skopos theory (Reiss and Vermeer, 1984).
Skopos theory is another translation perspective
which is no longer limited by conventional source-
text orientated views. It focusses on a purpose of
a translated text, and this purpose then determines
translation strategies and procedures. In order for
the translator to be able to interpret the purpose
and apply appropriate strategies for this purpose, a
translation brief provided by the client is deemed
necessary (Nord, 2006). This brief should con-
tain information about the intended function of the
target text, the target text recipient, the time and
place of text reception, the medium over which
the text will be transmitted, and the motive for the
production or reception of the text. For transla-
tions intended for MT evaluation, such brief would
have MT evaluation as purpose, MT researchers
and developers as recipients, assessment and de-
velopment of MT system(s) as the motive for the
production/reception of the text.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 84



5 Conclusions

This work reports a qualitative feedback from
the author, a translator with an extensive experi-
ence in MT evaluation who has tended to perform
fewer translation shifts than usual when working
on a task related to MT evaluation. The diver-
gences which were thoroughly avoided are related
to keeping the similarity on the sentence level,
since state-of-the-art MT systems still cannot go
beyond this level. Other lexical and structural di-
vergences were diminished due to the awareness of
the translation purpose.

In spite of this experience, the author is not con-
vinced that introducing such guidelines (for trans-
lation shifts and/or broader ones) on a more gen-
eral level would be beneficial for MT research.
One reason are the previously mentioned claims
and hype about MT reaching human parity. An-
other reason is the objectively rapid development
and improvement of MT systems. If more lit-
eral/less natural translations would be provided
and used for MT on a large scale, some of these
data sets could be repeatedly used for a longer pe-
riod of time (for example, the English-German test
set from WMT 2014 is still widely used for as-
sessing new MT systems in 2019). In this way, the
overall progress of MT would be measured using
too literal and not fully natural texts, which does
not seem appropriate.

On the other hand, a number of MT systems is
still being developed under sub-optimal conditions
(such as low-resourced languages, low computa-
tional resources, etc.). For such systems, guide-
lines on reducing translation shifts would help to
better identify main problems and directions for
further development. One possibility would be to
specify the goal of each particular evaluation as
purpose in a translation brief, for example “find-
ing most prominent errors in MT hypotheses”,
“estimating post-editing effort”, “measuring the
progress of an MT system over time”, etc.

The presented observations and suggestions are
certainly influenced by the perspective of the au-
thor whose experience is closely related to MT
evaluation. Still, these findings will hopefully ini-
tialise future research on the topic and bring trans-
lation procedures and MT together. This line of
research could generally bring the fields of MT
and TS closer, and initialise more collaborations
between translators and MT researchers.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the ADAPT Cen-
tre for Digital Content Technology at Dublin City
University, funded under the Science Founda-
tion Ireland Research Centres Programme (Grant
13/RC/2106) and co-funded under the European
Regional Development Fund.
Special thanks to Federico Gaspari for his great
support and invaluable advices.

References
Ahrenberg, Lars. 2006. Codified close translation

as a standard for MT. In Proceedings of the 10th
Annual Conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation (EAMT 2005), pages 218–229,
Budapest, Hungary, May.

Ahrenberg, Lars. 2017. Comparing machine transla-
tion and human translation: A case study. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop Human-Informed Trans-
lation and Interpreting Technology, pages 21–28,
Varna, Bulgaria, September.

Albrecht, Joshua S. and Rebecca Hwa. 2008. Re-
gression for machine translation evaluation at the
sentence level. Machine Translation, 22(1-2):1–27,
March.

Avramidis, Eleftherios, Aljoscha Burchardt, Sabine
Hunsicker, Maja Popović, Cindy Tscherwinka,
David Vilar Torres, and Hans Uszkoreit. 2014.
The taraXÜ Corpus of Human-Annotated Machine
Translations. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2014), pages 2679–2682, Reykjavik, Iceland,
May.

Baroni, Marco and Silvia Bernardini. 2006. A new
approach to the study of translationese: Machine-
learning the difference between original and trans-
lated text. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
21(3):259–274, September.

Bojar, Ondřej, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Shujian Huang,
Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu, Varvara Lo-
gacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Matt Post,
Raphael Rubino, Lucia Specia, and Marco Turchi.
2017. Findings of the 2017 conference on machine
translation (wmt17). In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2:
Shared Task Papers, pages 169–214, Copenhagen,
Denmark, September.

Bojar, Ondej, Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck,
Philipp Koehn, and Christof Monz. 2018. Find-
ings of the 2018 conference on machine translation
(wmt18). In Proceedings of the Third Conference on
Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers,

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 85



pages 272–307, Belgium, Brussels, October. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Catford, John Cunnison. 1965. A Linguistic Theory of
Translation: An Essay in Applied Linguistics. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Čulo, Oliver and Jean Nitzke. 2016. Patterns of termi-
nological variation in post-editing and of cognate use
in machine translation in contrast to human transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference
of the European Association for Machine Translation
(EAMT 2016), pages 106–114, Riga, Latvia.

Čulo, Oliver. 2014. Approaching machine translation
from translation studies – a perspective on common-
alities, potentials, differences. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual Conference of the European Association
for Machine Translation (EAMT 2014), pages 199–
206, Dubrovnik, Croatia, June.

Curys, Lea. 2006. Building a resource for study-
ing translation shifts. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 1240–1245, Genoa,
Italy, May.

Daems, Joke, Orphée De Clercq, and Lieve Macken.
2017. Translationese and post-editese : how com-
parable is comparable quality? Linguistica Antver-
piensia New Series – Themes in Translation Studie,
16:89–103.

Farrell, Michael. 2018. Machine translation markers
in post-edited machine translation output. In Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Conference Translating and the
Computer, pages 50–59, London, UK, November.

Fomicheva, Marina, Núria Bel, and Iria da Cunha.
2015. Neutralizing the effect of translation shifts on
automatic machine translation evaluation. Compu-
tational linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
pages 596–607.

Hassan, Hany, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal
Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark, Christian Federmann,
Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Will
Lewis, Mu Li, Shujie Liu, Tie-Yan Liu, Renqian
Luo, Arul Menezes, Tao Qin, Frank Seide, Xu Tan,
Fei Tian, Lijun Wu, Shuangzhi Wu, Yingce Xia,
Dongdong Zhang, Zhirui Zhang, , and Ming Zhou.
2018. Achieving human parity on automatic chinese
to english news translation. In arXiv.

Jones, Ruth and Ann Irvine. 2013. The (Un)faithful
Machine Translator. In Proceedings of the 7th Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Her-
itage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 96–
101, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

Lohar, Pintu, Maja Popovi’c, and Andy Way. 2019.
Building English-to-Serbian Machine Translation
System for IMDb Movie Reviews. In Proceedings of
the 7th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language
Processing (BSNLP 2019), Florence, Italy, August.

Newmark, Peter. 1988. A Textbook of Translation.
Prentice Hall, New York.

Nord, Christiane. 2006. Translating as a purposeful ac-
tivity: A prospective approach. TEFLIN, 17(2):131–
143.

Popović, Maja and Mihael Arčan. 2016. PE2rr Cor-
pus: Manual Error Annotation of Automatically Pre-
annotated MT Post-edits. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Portoro, Slovenia,
may.

Popović, Maja, Mihael Arcan, and Filip Klubička.
2016a. Language Related Issues for Machine Trans-
lation between Closely Related South Slavic Lan-
guages. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on NLP
for Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects (Var-
Dial3), pages 43–52, Osaka, Japan, December.

Popović, Maja, Mihael Arçan, and Arle Lommel.
2016b. Potential and limits of using post-edits as ref-
erence translations for MT evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of the 19th Annual Conference of the European
Association for Machine Translation (EAMT 2016),
pages 218–229, Riga, Latvia, June.

Rabinovich, Ella and Shuly Wintner. 2015. Unsu-
pervised identification of translationese. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 3:419–432, December.

Reiss, Katharina and Hans Vermeer. 1984. Towards
a General Theory of Translational Action; Skopos
Theory Explained (Grundlegung einer allgemeinen
Translationstheorie). Routledge, London.

Toral, Antonio and Andy Way. 2018. What level of
quality can neural machine translation attain on lit-
erary text? In Translation Quality Assessment. Ma-
chine Translation: Technologies and Applications,
pages 263–287. Springer.

Toral, Antonio, Sheila Castilho, Ke Hu, and Andy Way.
2018. Attaining the Unattainable? Reassessing
Claims of Human Parity in Neural Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Ma-
chine Translation (WMT 2018), pages 113–123, Bel-
gium, Brussels, October. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

van Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. 1989. Translation and
original: similarities and dissimilarities, i. Target,
1(2):151–181.

van Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. 1990. Translation and
original: similarities and dissimilarities, ii. Target,
1(2):69–95.

Venuti, Lawrence. 2001. Strategies of translation. In
Baker, M., editor, Routledge Encyclopedia of Trans-
lation Studies, pages 240–244. Routledge, London &
New York.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 86



Vinay, Jean-Paul and Jean Darbelnet. 1958. Compara-
tive Stylistics of French and English: A Methodology
for Translation. John Benjamins.

Wintner, Shuly. 2016. Translationese: Between human
and machine translation. In Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING 2016): Tutorial Abstracts, pages 18–
19, Osaka, Japan, December.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 87


