






















































A Plea for Information Structure as a Part of Meaning Representation


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 66–72
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

66

 

 

Abstract 

The view that the representation of 

information structure (IS) should be a part 

of (any type of) representation of meaning 

is based on the fact that IS is a 

semantically relevant phenomenon (Sect. 

2.1).  In the contribution, three arguments 

supporting this view are briefly 

summarized, namely, the relation of IS to 

the interpretation of negation and 

presupposition (Sect. 2.2), the relevance of 

IS to the understanding of discourse 

connectivity and for the establishment and 

interpretation of coreference relations 

(Sect. 2.3). A possible integration of the 

description of the main ingredients of IS 

into a meaning representation is illustrated 

in Section 3. 

1 Introduction 

After the more or less isolated (though well 

substantiated) inquiries into the issues concerning 

one of the bridges between sentence form and its 

function in discourse (starting with the pioneering 

studies by Czech scholars in the first half of the 

last century followed by such prominent linguists 

and semanticists as M. A. K. Halliday, B. H. 

Partee, M. Rooth, E. Prince, K. Lambrecht, M. 

Steedman, E. Vallduví & E. Engdahl, to name just 

a few),1 the last two decades of the last century 

witnessed an increasing interest of linguists in the 

study of information structure (IS). These 

approaches used different terms (theme-rheme, 

topic-focus, functional sentence perspective, 

presupposition and focus, background and focus, 

and a general term  information structure (being 

the most frequent) and claimed to be based on 

different fundamental oppositions and scales 

(given - new, aboutness relation, activation or 

                                                            
1 For the bibliographical references, see the Section 

References at the end of the paper. 

topicality scale) but all were more or less in 

agreement that this phenomenon, in addition to 

the syntactic structure of the sentence, is to be 

taken into account in an integrated description of 

the sentence and/or discourse, and that it 

significantly contributes to the study of the 

functioning of language. 

The theory of information structure we subscribe 

to (cf. e.g. Sgall 1967; 1979; Sgall, Hajičová and 

Panevová 1986) called Topic-Focus Articulation 

(TFA) is based on the “aboutness” relation: the 

Focus of the sentence says something ABOUT its 

Topic. This dichotomy is based on the primary 

notion of contextual boundness (see below, 

Section 3) and its representation is a part of the 

representation of the sentence on its underlying 

(deep, tectogrammatical) syntactic level, which is 

assumed to be a linguistically structured level of 

meaning. In addition to the basic dichotomy the 

TFA theory works with a hierarchy of the so-

called communicative dynamism, ie. an ordering 

of the meaningful lexical items (ie. items other 

than function words) of the sentence from the 

least communicatively important elements of the 

sentence to the elements with the highest degree 

of communicative importance. The TFA is 

considered to be a recursive phenomenon, which 

makes it possible to recognize – aside with the 

global Topic and the global Focus and based on 

the features of contextual boundness – also local 

topics and local foci. In this way, the TFA 

framework offers a possibility, if needed, to 

recognize more distinctions in addition to the 

basic dichotomy (as done, e.g. by the focus – 

background approach of Vallduví and Engdahl 

(1996), or as needed, according to e.g. Bṻring 

(1997) or Steedman (2000),  for a proper account 

of prosody). 

A Plea for Information Structure as a Part of Meaning Representation 
 

 

Eva Hajičová 

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics 

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics 

Charles University, Prague 

hajicova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz 

 



67

 

 

2 Information Structure as a Semanti-

cally Relevant Phenomenon 

2.1 Basic argument 

The crucial argument in support of an inclusion of 

the representation of information structure into a 

representation of meaning relates to the fact that 

IS is semantically relevant, as can be documented 

by examples (1) to (3), taken from early literature 

on these issues (the capitals denote the intonation 

center). 

(1) (a) Dogs must be CARRIED. 

         (a') CARRY dogs. 

      (b) DOGS must be carried.  

         (b') Carry DOGS. (Halliday 1967) 

(2) (a) English is spoken in the SHETLANDS. 

      (b) In the Shetlands, ENGLISH is spoken. 

(Sgall 1967) 

(3) (a) Mary always takes John to the MOVIES. 

      (b) Mary always takes JOHN to the movies. 

(Rooth 1985) 

For the sake of simplicity, let us reduce here the 

more differentiated approach of TFA into an 

articulation of the sentence into its Topic (what is 

the sentence about) and Focus (what the sentence 

says about its Topic). Then it can be easily  seen 

that the (a) and (b) sentences in the above sets 

(capitals indicating the intonation center) differ in 

this articulation and, correspondingly, differ in 

their meaning: (1)(b) is non-sensical (one can use 

the underground elevator also without a dog), 

(2)(a) even false (English is spoken in other 

countries as well) and (3)(a) and (b) reflect 

different situations in the real world (It is always 

the movies where John is taken vs. It is always 

John who is taken to the movies). In the surface 

shape of the sentences, the different 

interpretations of the (a) and (b) sentences in each 

set are rendered by different surface means, such 

as word order or the position of the intonation 

center, but have to be accounted for in the 

representation of their meaning if the sentences 

have to receive the appropriate corresponding 

reading. For an example from a typologically 

different language with a rather flexible word 

order, cf. the Czech equivalents of the sentences 

(1) through (3), with the assumed prototypical 

placement of the intonation center at the end of 

the sentence (indicated again by capitals). 

(1‟) (a) Psy neste v NÁRUČÍ. 

       (b) V náručí neste PSY. 

(2‟) (a) Anglicky se mluví na Shetlandských 

OSTROVECH. 

         (b) Na Shetlandských ostrovech se mluví 

ANGLICKY. 

(3‟) (a) Marie bere Honzu vţdy do KINA. 

       (b) Marie bere do kina vţdy HONZU. 

2.2 Negation and presuppostion 

Semantic relevance of IS is attested also by the 

analysis of the semantics of negation and of the 

specification of the notion of presupposition. If IS 

of a sentence is understood  in terms of an 

aboutness relation between the Topic of the 

sentence, then in the prototypical case of negative 

sentences, the Focus does not hold about the 

Topic; in a secondary case, the negative sentence 

is about a negated topic and something is said 

about this topic.2 Thus, prototypically, the 

sentence (4) is about John (Topic) and it holds 

about John that he didn‟t come to watch TV 

(negated Focus).  

(4) John didn‟t come to watch TV. 

However, there may be a secondary interpretation 

of the negative sentence, e.g. in the context of (5). 

(5) John didn‟t come, because he suddenly fell 

ill. 

One of the interpretations of (5) is that the 

sentence is about John‟s not-coming (Topic) and 

it says about this negated event that is happened 

because he suddenly fell ill (Focus). 

As Hajičová (e.g.1973; 1984) documented, there 

is a close relation between IS, negation and 

presupposition (see the original analysis of 

presupposition as a specific kind of the entailment 

                                                            
2 An objection that one cannot speak about a non-existent 

topic does not arise: one can speak about an absence as well 

as about not-coming, not-visiting (cf. Strawson‟s example 

below), etc.  See also Heim‟s treatment of the definite-

indefinite noun phrases and her notion of file change 

semantics in which meanings are analyzed as context-

change potentials  (Heim 1982; 1983). See  also the 

pioneering study of the relation between theme-rheme and 

negation by Zemb (1968). 



68

 

 

relation by Strawson (1952) and Strawson‟s 

(1964) notion of referential availability in his 

analysis of the sentence The exhibition was visited 

by the King of France. and its negation):  

(6) (a) John caused our VICTORY. 

      (b) John didn‟t cause our VICTORY. 

      (c) Though he played well as usual, the rest 

of the team was very weak (and nothing 

could   have prevented our defeat). 

(7) (a) Our victory was caused by JOHN. 

      (b) Our victory was not caused by JOHN. 

(8) We won. 

Both (6)(a) and (7)(a) imply (8). However, it is 

only the negative counterpart of (7)(a), namely 

(7)(b), that  implies (8), while (6)(b) may appear 

also in a context suggesting that we were 

defeated, see (6)(c). In terms of presuppositions, 

the statement (8) belongs to the presuppositions of 

(7)(a) since it is entailed both by the positive as 

well as by the negative sentence, but not to the 

presuppositions of (6)(a) as it is not entailed by 

the negative sentence.3 

2.3 Discourse connectivity 

Another phenomenon, though going beyond the 

interpretation of a single sentence but important 

for the interpretation of a text (discourse), is 

discourse connectivity. There have been several 

proposals in literature how to account for these 

relations, the centering theory being one of the 

most deeply elaborated (cf. Grosz, Joshi and 

Weinstein, 1983 and its corpus-based evaluation 

in Poesio et al. 2004). It is based on the model of 

the local attentional states of speakers and hearers 

as proposed by Grosz and Sidner (1986). Each 

utterance in discourse is considered to contain a 

backward looking center, which links it with the 

preceding utterance, and a set of entities called 

forward looking centers; these entities are ranked 

according to language-specific ranking principles 

stated in terms of syntactic functions of the 

                                                            
3 The specific kind of entailment illustrated here by the 

above examples was introduced in Hajičová (1972) and 

called allegation: an allegation is an assertion A entailed by 

an assertion carried by a sentence S, with which the 

negative counterpart of S entails neither A nor its negation 

(see also the discussion by Partee 1996). 

 

referring expressions. Related treatment rooted in 

the Praguian traditional account of IS is the idea 

of so-called thematic progressions (Daneš 1970), 

explicitly referring to the relation between the 

theme (Topic) and the rheme (Focus) of a 

sentence and the theme (Topic) or the rheme 

(Focus) of the next following sentence (a simple 

linear thematic progression and a thematic 

progression with a continuous theme), or to a 

„global‟ theme (derived themes) of the (segment 

of the) discourse. As demonstrated in Hajičová 

and Mírovský (2018a), an annotation of a text 

(corpus) in terms of Topic and Focus makes it 

possible to find these links between sentences and 

in this way to account for the structure of 

discourse. In a similar vein, it has been 

demonstrated that a meaning representation 

including some basic attributes of IS serves well 

for an establishment and interpretation of 

coreference relations (Hajičová and Mírovský 

2018b). 

3 Information Structure in an 
Annotated Corpus 

The observations documenting the semantic 

relevance of the information structure (Sect. 2.1 

and 2.2 above) indicate that the information  

structure (Topic-Focus articulation) of the sen-

tence belongs to the domain of the (syntactico-) 

semantic structure of the sentence rather than 

exclusively to the domain of discourse (or, in 

more general terms, to the domain of pragmatics), 

as sometimes claimed. However, this is not to 

deny the interrelation or interaction between the 

two domains and, as illustrated in Section 2.3, the 

inclusion of the basic features of IS into the 

representation of meaning may serve well also for 

the description of the structure of discourse. 

In this final section of our paper we present an 

example of the annotation scenario illustrating 

how IS is represented in the Praguian 

dependency-based sentence representations. For a 

simplified example of such a representation for 

sentences in (1), see the Appendix. 

The overall annotation scenario includes three 

levels: (a) morphemic (with detailed part-of-

speech tags and rich information on 

morphological categories), (b) surface shape 

(“analytical”, in the form of dependency-based 

tree structures with the verb as the root of the tree 

and with relations labeled by superficial syntactic 



69

 

 

functions such as Subject, Object, Adverbial, 

Attribute, etc.), and (c) underlying dependency-

based syntactic level (so-called tectogrammatical) 

with dependency tree structures labeled by 

functions such as Actor, Patient, Addressee, etc. 

and  including also information on the IS (Topic-

Focus articulation) of sentences.4 For this 

purpose, a special TFA attribute is established in 

the scenario for the representation of a sentence 

on the tectogrammatical level, with three possible 

values, one of which is assigned to every node of 

the tree; these values specify, whether the node is 

contextually bound non-contrastive, contextually 

bound contrastive, or contextually non-bound. A 

contextually bound (cb) node represents  an item 

presented by the speaker as referring to an entity 

assumed to be easily accessible by the hearer(s), 

i.e. more or less predictable, readily available to 

the hearers in their memory, while a contextually 

non-bound (nb) node represents an item presented 

as not directly available in the given context, 

cognitively „new‟. While the characteristics 

„given‟ and „new‟ refer only to the cognitive 

background of the distinction of contextual 

boundness, the distinction itself is an opposition 

understood as a grammatically patterned feature, 

rather than in the literal sense of the term. This 

point is illustrated e.g. by (9). 

(9) (Tom entered together with his friends.)  My 

mother recognized only HIM, but no one 

from his COMPANY. 

Both Tom and his friends are „given‟ by the 

preceding context (indicated here by the 

preceding sentence in the brackets), but in the 

given sentence they are structured as non-bound 

(which is reflected in the surface shape of the 

sentence by the position of the intonation center). 

The appurtenance of an item to the Topic or 

Focus of the sentence is then derived on the basis 

of the features cb or nb assigned to individual 

nodes of the tree (see Sgall 1979): 

(a) the main verb (V) and any of its direct 

dependents belong to F iff they carry index nb; 

                                                            
4 In addition, two kinds of information are being added in 

the latest version of PDT, namely annotation of discourse 

relations based on the analysis of discourse connectors 

(inspired by the Pennsylvania Discourse Treebank) and 

information on grammatical and on textual intra- and inter-

sentential coreference relations. 

 

(b) every item that does not depend directly on V 

and is subordinated to an element of F different 

from V, belongs to F (where “subordinated to” is 

defined as the irreflexive transitive closure of 

“depend on”); 

(c) iff V and all items directly depending on V are 

cb, then it is necessary to specify the rightmost k’ 

node of the cb nodes dependent on V and ask 

whether some of nodes l dependent on k’ are nb; 

if so, this nb node and all its dependents belong to 

F; if not so, then specify the immediately adjacent 

(i.e. preceding) sister node of  k’ and ask whether 

some of its dependents is cb; these steps are 

repeated until an nb node depending (immediately 

or not) on a cb node directly dependent on V is 

found. This node and all its dependent nodes are 

then specified as F. 

(d) every item not belonging to F according to (a) 

- (c) belongs to T. 

This algorithm has been implemented and is 

applied in all experiments connected with 

research questions related to IS. 

As described in Zikánová et al. (2009), the SH 

algorithm was applied to a part of the PDT data 

(about 11 thousand sentences). The results 

indicate that a clear division of the sentence into 

Topic and Focus according to the hypothesized 

rules has been achieved in 94.28% of sentences to 

which the procedure has been applied; 4.41% of 

sentences contained the type of focus referring to 

a node (or nodes) that belong(s) to the 

communicatively most dynamic part of the 

sentence though they depend on a contextually 

bound node. The real problem of the algorithm 

then rests with the case of ambiguous partition 

(1.14%) and cases where no focus was recognized 

(0.11%). In Rysová et al. (2015) some of the 

shortcomings of the previous implementation 

described in Zikánová et al. (2009) were removed 

and the algorithm was evaluated in a slightly 

different way: as the gold data we used data 

annotated by a linguist assuming that the results 

would better reflect the adequacy of the algorithm 

for transforming values of contextual boundness 

into the division of the sentence into the Topic and 

the Focus. Our gold data consisted of 319 

sentences from twelve PDT documents annotated 

by a single linguistic expert. Without taking into 

account (already annotated but now hidden) 

values of contextual boundness, the annotator 



70

 

 

marked each node as belonging either to the Topic 

or to the Focus. On these gold data, the new 

implementation of the algorithm was evaluated, 

see Table 1.5 

Table 1: Evaluation of the SH algorithm. 

4 Summary 

In our contribution we argue that a meaning 

representation of any type should include 

information on basic features of information 

structure.  Our argument stems from the fact that 

information structure (at least the articulation of a 

sentence into its Topic and Focus) is semantically 

relevant which is demonstrated on several 

examples, taking into account also the 

representation of negation and presupposition. An 

inclusion of the representation of information 

structure into an overall representation of meaning 

also helps to account for some basic features of 

discourse connectivity and coreference relations. 

In the Appendix, we have briefly characterized 

one possible way of representation of the basic 

features of information structure.  

5 Appendix 

To attest the plausibility of a representation of IS 

in an annotated corpus, we present here rather 

simplified representations of the sentences given 

above in (1). The symbols ACT, PAT and Gen 

stand for the deep syntactic functions Actor, 

Patient and General Actor, respectively, Deb(itive) 

and Imper stand for deontic and sentential 

modality, and cb and nb stand for the contextually 

bound and contextually non-bound values of the 

TFA attribute. The vertical dotted line denotes the 

boundary between Topic and Focus. 

                                                            
5 It significantly outperformed the baseline, which was 

defined as follows: in the linear (surface) form of the 

sentence, each word before the autosemantic part of the 

predicate verb belongs to Topic, the rest of the sentence 

belongs to Focus. 

(1) (a) Dogs must be CARRIED. 

 

 

(1) (b) DOGS must be carried. 

 

 

(1) (a') CARRY dogs. 

 

 

(1) (b') Carry DOGS. 

 

 

Acknowledgments 

The author gratefully acknowledges support from 

the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic 

(project LM2018101 – LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ). 

I am also very much grateful to Jiří Mírovský for 

his help with the formatting of the text. 



71

 

 

References  

Bäuerle, R., Schwarze C. &  A. von Stechow, Eds.  

(1983), Meaning, Use and Interpretation of 

Language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 

Bṻring, D. (1997). The Meaning of Topic and Focus – 

The 59th Street Bridge    Accent. Londoin: 

Routledge. 

Cole, P.,  Ed.. (1981). Radical Pragmatics. New York: 

Academic Press. 

Daneš, F. (1970). Zur linguistischen Analyse der 

Textstruktur. Folia linguistica 4, 1/2, 72-78. 

Grosz, B. & Sidner, C. L. (1986). Attention, 

Intentions and the structure of discourse. 

Computational Linguistics, 12, 175–204. 

Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K. & S. Weinstein (1995). 

Centering: A Framework for modeling the local 

coherence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 

21, 203-225.  

Hajič, J., Bejček, E., Bémová, A., Buráňová, E., 

Hajičová, E., Havelka, J., Homola, P., Kárník, J., 

Kettnerová, V., Klyueva, N., Kolářová, V., Kučová, 

L., Lopatková, M., Mikulová, M., Mírovský, J., 

Nedoluzhko, A., Pajas, P., Panevová, J., Poláková, 

L., Rysová, M., Sgall, P., Spoustová, J., Straňák, P., 

Synková, P., Ševčíková, M., Štěpánek, J., Urešová, 

Z., Vidová Hladká, B., Zeman, D., Zikánová, Š. & 

Ţabokrtský, Z. (2018). Prague Dependency 

Treebank 3.5. Institute of Formal and Applied 

Linguistics, LINDAT/CLARIN, Charles 

University, LINDAT/CLARIN PID: 

http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2621 

Hajičová E. (1973), Negation and topic vs. comment. 

Philologica Pragensia 17, 18-25. Reprinted in 

Hajičová (2017),  50-62. 

Hajičová E.  (1984), Presupposition and allegation 

revisited. Journal of Pragmatics 8:155-167. 

Reprinted in Hajičová (2017),  63-77. 

Hajičová, E. (2017). Syntax-Semantics Interface.  

Prague: Karolinum 

Hajičová E. & J. Mírovský (2018a), Discourse 

Coherence Through the Lens of an Annotated Text 

Corpus: A Case Study. In: Proceedings of LREC 

2018, Miyazaki, Japan. 

Hajičová E. & J. Mírovský (2018b), Topic/Focus vs. 

Given/New: Information Structure and 

Coreference Relations in an Annotated Corpus. 

Presented at the 2018 Annual Conference of 

Societas Linguistica Europaea, Tallin, Latvia. 

Halliday, M. A. K. (1967a). Intonation and Grammar 

in British English. The Hague: Mouton. 

Halliday, M. A. K. (1967b). Notes on transitivity and 

theme in English. Part 2. Journal of Linguistics 3, 

199-244. 

Heim, I. (1982). The semantics of definite and 

indefinite noun phrases. PhD Thesis, Univ. of 

Massachusetts, Amherst. 

Heim, I. (1983). File chnge semantics and the 

familiarity theory of definiteness. In: Bäuerle, 

Schwarze &  von Stechow, Eds.  (1983), 164-189.  

Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information Structure and 

Sentence Form. Topic, Focus and the Mental 

Representations of Discourse Referents. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Partee, B. H. (1996), Allegation and local 

accommodation. In: Partee & Sgall, Eds. (1996), 

65-86. 

Partee, B. H. &  Sgall, P., Eds. (1996). Discourse and 

meaning.  Amsterdam/Philadelphia:  John 

Benjamins. 

Prince, E. (1981). Toward a taxonomy of given/new 

information. In: Cole, Ed.. (1981), 223-254. 

Rooth, M. (1985). Association with focus. PhD 

Thesis, Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst. 

Rysová, K., Mírovský, J. & E. Hajičová (2015). On 

an apparent freedom of Czech word order. A case 

study. In: 14th International Workshop on 

Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT 2015), 

IPIPAN, Warszawa, Poland, 93–105. 

Sgall P. (1967), Functional Sentence Perspective in a 

generative description of language. Prague Studies 

in Mathematical Linguistics 2, Prague, Academia, 

203-225.  

Sgall P. (1979), Towards a Definition of Focus and 

Topic. Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics 

31, 3-25; 32, 1980, 24-32; printed in Prague 

Studies in Mathematical Linguistics 78, 1981, 173-

198. 

Sgall, P.,  Hajičová, E. & and J. Panevová (1986). The 

Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and 

Pragmatic Aspects. Dordrecht: D. Reidel. 

Steedman, M. (2000),. Information structure and the 

syntax-phonology interface. Linguistic Inquiry 31, 

649-689. 

Steinberg, D. D. & Jakobovits, L. A. Eds. (1971). 

Semantics. -  An interdisciplinary reader. 

Cambridge, Mass.:  Cambridge University Press. 

Strawson, P. (1952). Introduction to Logical Theory. 

London: Methuen 

Strawson, P. (1964). Identifying reference and truth 

values. Theoria 30, 96-118. Reprinted in Steinberg 

& Jakobovits, Eds. (1971), 86-99. 



72

 

 

Vallduví, E. & Engdahl, E. (1996). The linguistic 

realization of information packaging. Linguistics 

34, 459-519. 

Zemb, J-M. (1968). Les structures logiques de la 

proposition allemande. Contribution à l'étude des 

rapports entre la langue et la pensée. Paris: 

O.C.D.L. 

Zikánová, Š. & M. Týnovský (2009). Identification of 

Topic and Focus in Czech: Comparative 

Evaluation on Prague Dependency Treebank. In: 

Zybatow, G. et al.,  Eds. Studies in Formal Slavic 

Phonology, Morphology, Syntax, Semantics and 

Information Structure. Formal Description of 

Slavic Languages 7, Frankfurt am Main: Peter 

Lang., 343–353. 

 


