




































Computerized Note-taking in Consecutive Interpreting:  

A Pen-voice Integrated Approach towards Omissions, Additions and 

Reconstructions in Notes 

Abstract 

 Although note-taking has received extensive at-

tention from scholars in interpreting studies, most 

of the discussions focus on the descriptive fea-

tures of notes and derive from personal experience 

with no empirical support. Instead of solely focus-

ing on the product of note-taking, i.e. notes, where 

many contradictory findings about note pattern 

and its connections with interpreting performance 

were witnessed, this study proposes and practices 

an innovative approach to visualize the process of 

note-taking and review the composition of notes. 

It is expected to find efficient note-taking strate-

gies for interpreters who always find it hard to ap-

ply the proposed principles in their own note-tak-

ing due to the high individuality of notes. 

By replaying the note-taking process recorded by 

a Wacom smart pen and FlashBack (an open 

screen recorder) in ELAN (a free annotation 

toolkit), the researcher can annotate the starting 

time, the finishing time and the intended meaning 

of each note, thus coding notes into computerized 

data (NT standing for note-taking text). After au-

tomatic speech transcription (ASR) and manual 

correction of the source text (ST) and target text 

(TT), note-taking transcription can be concate-

nated with ST, and then then imported into CRITT 

Translation Process Database (CRITT TPR-DB) 

for alignment. 

One distinctive feature of this dataset is its 

unparalleled nature. During interpreting, 

interpreters always filter and process the input 

information by taking advantage of their personal 

experience, world knowledge and specialized 

knowledge. It is therefore very common to find 

additions, omissions and reconstructions in TT 

and NT. This explains why during ST-TT 

                                                 
 © Huolingxiao Kuang 2019. This article is licensed under a 

Creative Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribu-

tion, CCBY-ND. 

alignment, renderings with no correspondence in 

ST are not aligned. This phenomenon is even 

more prominent in ST-NT alignment (the 

alignment of the ST with the notes that were taken 

during the listening phase) since notes are a by-

product of ST understanding and a predecessor of 

TT production, rather than a shorthand of neither 

the ST nor the TT. 

By observing how unparalleled nature develops, 

interpreters’ note-taking preferences, such as 

grammatical focus (subjects, verbs, etc.), 

information selection (proper nouns, numbers, 

etc.), note quantity and note-taking strategies 

(ellipse, restricting and high condensation), can be 

identified and further linked with interpreting 

performance. In addition, ear-pen span - which 

refers to the time lag between the source text input 

and the production of notes - can be a valuable 

indicator of cognitive load, implying the difficulty 

of language processing at the given interpreting 

environment. 

Computerization, therefore, carves out a new path 

for note-taking researchers to dig into both the 

product and process of note-taking. Linking note 

choices and note-taking behaviours with ST input 

and TT production provides researchers a 

precious opportunity to answer the kernel 

question in note-taking research: how to reduce 

processing capacity and time requirements of 

note-taking while maintain the efficiency of 

notes” (Gile,1995/2009, p. 178). 

References 

Gile, Daniel (1995, 2009). Basic Concepts and Models 

for Interpreter and Translator Training. Amster-

dam: John Benjamins. 

 

Huolingxiao Kuang 

Durham University 

Dep.t of  Modern Languages and Cultures 

England, United Kingdom 
huolingxiao.kuang@durham.ac.uk 

 

 

 

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 18


