



















































Annotation of Rhetorical Moves in Biochemistry Articles


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Argument Mining, pages 113–123
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

113

Annotation of Rhetorical Moves in Biochemistry Articles

Mohammed Alliheedi
Al Baha University, KSA

University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

mallihee@uwaterloo.ca

Robert E. Mercer
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, Canada
mercer@csd.uwo.ca

Robin Cohen
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
rcohen@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

This paper focuses on the real world applica-
tion of scientific writing and on determining
rhetorical moves, an important step in estab-
lishing the argument structure of biomedical
articles. Using the observation that the struc-
ture of scholarly writing in laboratory-based
experimental sciences closely follows labora-
tory procedures, we examine most closely the
Methods section of the texts and adopt an ap-
proach of identifying rhetorical moves that are
procedure-oriented. We also propose a verb-
centric frame semantics with an effective set
of semantic roles in order to support the analy-
sis. These components are designed to support
a computational model that extends a promis-
ing proposal of appropriate rhetorical moves
for this domain, but one which is merely de-
scriptive. Our work also contributes to the
understanding of argument-related annotation
schemes. In particular, we conduct a detailed
study with human annotators to confirm that
our selection of semantic roles is effective in
determining the underlying rhetorical structure
of existing biomedical articles in an extensive
dataset. The annotated dataset that we produce
provides the important knowledge needed for
our ultimate goal of analyzing biochemistry
articles.

1 Introduction

Scientists must routinely review the scholarly lit-
erature in their fields to keep abreast of current
advances and to retrieve information relevant to
their research. However, the volume of online sci-
entific literature is immense, and rapidly increas-
ing. In the biomedical field, the National Cen-
ter for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) devel-
oped a literature search engine, PubMed1, to ac-
cess various databases such as MEDLINE (jour-
nal citations and abstracts for biomedical litera-
ture), full-text life science e-journals, and online

1http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed

books. Between 2010 and 2018 PubMed repos-
itories increased from more than 20 million cita-
tions for biomedical literature (Lu, 2011) to more
than 28 million2. As a consequence, it has be-
come extremely challenging for biomedical sci-
entists to keep current with information in their
fields. This challenge has attracted Natural Lan-
guage Processing researchers to develop resources
and automated tools for performing various tasks
in Information Extraction and Text Mining using
online corpora of biomedical articles, and thus en-
able biomedical researchers to better manage and
exploit this volume of data (Hunter and Cohen,
2006).

The types of tasks currently handled by
Biomedical Natural Language Processing
(BioNLP) systems have generally been aimed
at extracting very specific and limited infor-
mation, for example, protein and gene names
and relations (Cohen and Demner-Fushman,
2014), and so have been able to rely on relatively
simple forms of information extraction. Although
these approaches fulfil some information needs,
more in-depth and comprehensive information
contained in biomedical texts would be highly
valuable to scientists. This type of information
can enable validating scientific claims, tracing
current research directions, reproducing scientific
procedures, and so forth. Recently, a new and
more challenging information extraction task has
been introduced as a means of obtaining this type
of information: identifying the argumentation
structure in biomedical articles (e.g., (Green,
2014, 2015)).

The essence of argumentation can be considered
as influencing others to gain their adherence to
a particular idea (Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca,
1973). Arguments have an explicit logical struc-
ture, for example, claims that are backed with rea-
sons, which in turn are supported by evidence,

2http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK3827/



114

leading to conclusions (Toulmin, 2003). Argu-
mentation analysis is the recognition and identi-
fication of the different forms of argumentative
structures in texts. Various studies have used re-
current patterns of text organization called rhetor-
ical moves (i.e., text segments that are rhetor-
ical and perform specific communicative goals)
to analyze argumentative organization of texts
manually (Swales, 1990) or automatically (Teufel
and Moens, 2002). Swales’ CARS model tar-
gets the Introduction section3 of scientific arti-
cles. Teufel’s interests are concentrated on rhetor-
ical moves associated with defining the research
space and suggesting the knowledge claims for
computational linguistics and chemistry articles
(Teufel, 2010). Kanoksilapatham (2003) adds to
these works by providing the first comprehensive
set of rhetorical moves for complete biochemistry
articles.

With our long-term goal being analyzing argu-
mentation in biochemistry articles, our mid-term
research goal is to provide a computational model
for Kanoksilapatham’s descriptive rhetorical move
taxonomy. Our research agenda is to design algo-
rithms which would produce a representation of
rhetorical moves in a biochemistry article and in
this paper we outline the proposed semantic cate-
gories to be used, and discuss how we were able to
guide human annotators to provide their interpre-
tations of the analysis (to later be used as a gold
standard in order to test our solutions).

Initially, our focus is on the Methods section of
the taxonomy since this provides a description of
the procedures followed in the experiment and the
analysis of the results of the experiment thereby
giving a framework for analyzing the moves in the
remainder of the article. Because the experimental
process is procedural, the moves tend to follow the
verbs describing the steps in the experimental pro-
cess. In other words, argumentation structure and
scientific method both consist of rhetorical moves
and experimental process, respectively. When a
scientist describes her/his method in the writen ar-
ticle, it contains a list of experimental steps which
are described by verbs (actions). These verbs
evoke (initiate) the rhetorical moves in the writing.
To understand the moves, we need information
about the semantic roles associated with these pro-
cedural verbs. Two well known databases contain-

3Experimental articles in the biomedical sciences are nor-
mally organized in the IMRaD style: Introduction, Methods,
Results, and Discussion.

ing semantic role information, Framenet (Baker
et al., 1998) and Verbnet (Schuler, 2005), do not
provide the information appropriate for the verbs
found in this scientific domain. Our goal is to pro-
vide FrameNet and VerbNet-like information for
the specialized domain of biochemistry.

So, the focus of this paper is to introduce the
semantic roles that we are proposing for this do-
main, some of which are the same as those nor-
mally found and some which are new and we sug-
gest are required for this domain. With these se-
mantic roles and the Methods section rhetorical
moves, we have begun annotating a corpus of the
Methods sections from biochemistry articles. The
annotation consists of the semantic roles and the
rhetorical moves associated with each verb.

The paper is structured as follows: First, an
overview of some theoretical and computational
approaches to argumentation are presented in Sec-
tion 2. Then, our proposed approach to argumen-
tation analysis is described in Section 3. Next, a
description of our annotation scheme is given in
Section 4. A description of an annotation study
conducted along with the creation of a dataset is
given in Section 5. Finally, the future work and a
conclusion of this paper is given in Section 6.

2 Related Work

2.1 Theoretical Approaches to Rhetorical
Moves and Argumentation

Swales (1990) proposed the Create-A-Research-
Space (CARS) model that uses intuition about
the argumentative structure of scientific research
articles. Swales defined rhetorical moves as
text segments that convey communicative goals.
However, despite the widespread influence of
the CARS model, some researchers observed
two problems: (i) the inconsistent assignment of
rhetorical moves to text segments because the
identification of the rhetorical moves relies on
overall text comprehension, and (ii) a lack of
empirical validation of moves in linguistic terms
(Kanoksilapatham, 2003).

To overcome these problems, Kanoksilapatham
(2003) advanced Swales’ approach to move anal-
ysis by developing a framework that combines
his original CARS model with the use of Biber’s
(1991) multidimensional analysis to enrich the
model with additional information about linguistic
characteristics. Although Kanoksilapatham pro-
vides an extension to the Swales move analysis



115

study and attempted a validation of these moves
in biochemistry articles, she only provides a de-
scriptive analysis about rhetorical moves without
defining an explicit method for analyzing and rec-
ognizing these moves in texts.

2.2 Annotating Rhetorical Moves and
Argumentation Schemes

Argumentative Zoning (AZ) was developed by
Teufel and Moens (1999) to categorize sentences
based on their contextual information (e.g., deter-
mining authorship of knowledge claims). The AZ
scheme classifies sentences into seven categories
including the ones from the CARS model (Swales,
1990). The data set consisted of 48 computational
linguistic papers. Three annotators were involved
in the study to extract sentences that fell into these
seven categories. The results showed kappa scores
of 83% and 82% between the annotators in the first
and second schemes, respectively. The AZ scheme
was later modified to suit the characteristics of bi-
ology articles (Mizuta et al., 2006). Furthermore,
Teufel et al. (2009) and Teufel (2010) proposed a
revised version of AZ to include more categories
for annotating scientific articles such as chemistry.
This revised version was planned to model all ex-
perimental sciences, which is challenging, since
the style of scientific writing varies across disci-
plines. Most recently, Teufel (2015) has proposed
a modified version of AZ to recognize rhetorical
moves in scientific articles.

Liakata et al. (2012) developed an annotation
scheme called Core Scientific Concepts (CoreSC)
to classify sentences into scientific categories
(e.g., “related to author’s other work”). The au-
thors use Machine Learning classifiers (i.e., Con-
ditional Random Fields and Support Vector Ma-
chines) to automatically classify sentences into
the CoreSC categories. The data set consisted of
265 biochemistry and chemistry articles. The au-
thors were only able to achieve an accuracy around
50% in categorizing sentences in the appropriate
CoreSC scientific categories indicating that this is
a very difficult task.

Overall, these different approaches based on ar-
gumentation theories for analyzing and recogniz-
ing argumentative elements, including move anal-
ysis ((Kanoksilapatham, 2003) (Swales, 1990)),
argumentative zoning (Teufel et al., 1999), and
epistemic topoi (Gladkova, 2011), lacked a formal
knowledge representation which could be used

computationally for in-depth argumentation anal-
ysis and mining.

Another problem in identifying argumentative
elements is that relatively few biomedical related
corpora annotated with argumentation structures
currently exist for use in training or evaluating Ma-
chine Learning classifiers.4 This has encouraged
researchers to begin developing annotated corpora
for use by the Computational Argumentation com-
munity ((Green, 2014, 2015), in particular).

Green (2014) proposed a plan for creating an
annotated corpus of biomedical genetics research
articles. Importantly, in justifying the need for
such a corpus, Green strongly argued for do-
main knowledge as a requisite of argumentation
recognition in the experimental sciences. Green
(2015) specified a set of argumentation schemes
for scientific claims in genetics research articles.
The author used a corpus of unannotated genetics
research articles, and identified the components
(e.g., premises, conclusions) of an argument as
well as its type of scheme. Overall, the author’s
ultimate goal for this initial study was to develop
annotation guidelines for creating corpora for ar-
gumentation mining research.

None of these previous approaches to auto-
mated argumentation analysis and mining pro-
vided a formal knowledge representation that
could be used in detecting and recognizing ar-
gumentative elements. We believe that develop-
ing a formal representational framework based on
verb semantics in procedural scientific discourse
will enable a more in-depth analysis of argumen-
tative elements in a computationally feasible man-
ner. We intend to provide such knowledge for the
biochemistry domain to achieve this goal. This
paper discusses the annotation of a corpus of bio-
chemistry text, the first step in this longer term en-
terprise.

3 Procedurally Rhetorical Verb-centric
Frame Semantics

In this research we will work on the biochemistry
domain to develop a formal knowledge represen-
tation, procedurally rhetorical verb-centric frame
semantics, that can be used for in-depth argumen-

4We note, however, increasing attention to this concern,
with the design of such corpora as The Internet Argument
Corpus (IAC) for research in political debates on internet
forums (Walker et al., 2012) and the Dr. Inventor Multi-
Layer Scientific Corpus (DRI) for computer graphics articles
(Lauscher et al., 2018).



116

tation analysis, is computationally feasible to im-
plement, and will enable argumentation mining
of more-detailed scientific knowledge than is cur-
rently available. This will be an important step to-
wards providing researchers in Computational Ar-
gumentation working in domains with similar dis-
course structure with a means of using and evalu-
ating the metrics we will develop. To the best of
our knowledge, no research has proposed or incor-
porated the idea of a semantic frame based on verb
analysis to assist in the analysis of argumentation
in biochemistry articles.

We have introduced various methods for de-
tecting rhetorical moves in Section 2. We hy-
pothesize that recognizing and detecting rhetori-
cal moves would provide additional information
to our framework of argumentation analysis. We
also hypothesize that the Methods sections in bio-
chemistry articles contain rhetorical moves which
can be correlated with the author’s experimental
procedures. These moves can be used to deter-
mine salient information about the elements of the
article’s argumentative structure (e.g., premises)
and can contribute to the overall understanding
of the author’s scientific claims. A key aspect
of our hypothesis is that development of a frame-
based knowledge representation can be based on
the semantics of the verbs associated with these
procedures. This representation can provide de-
tailed knowledge for understanding these rhetori-
cal moves, which will in turn facilitate analysis of
argumentation structure. In other words, we pro-
pose that a procedurally rhetorical verb-centric
frame semantics can be used to obtain a deeper
analysis of sentence meaning than is currently the
case with simple methods of Information Extrac-
tion (e.g., shallow syntactic pattern) and in a com-
putationally feasible manner. Hence our focus on
this critical section as a starting point for confirm-
ing the value of our chosen model for rhetorical
moves and semantic roles.

Scientific argument5 is defined as a process that
scientists follow by using certain procedures to
obtain empirical data which will either support
or defeat their claims, hence leading to the in-
tended conclusion. The strength of a scientific ar-
gument depends on its reproducibility and consis-
tency. For a scientific argument to be strong, a
scientist should identify and explain all the proce-

5http://www.ces.fau.edu/nasa/introduction/scientific-
inquiry/why-do-scientists-argue-and-challenge-each-others-
results.php

dures in their experiment, i.e., reproducibility, so
that another researcher who follows the same pro-
cedures will reach the same conclusion, i.e., con-
sistency. Thus, for a well-constructed scientific ar-
ticle, a scientist should expect the same conclusion
if she follows the same procedures in the same se-
quence as described in the Methods section.

Scientific writing in the biochemistry domain
has certain characteristics that made it ideal for our
purposes. In this domain, experimental procedures
describe the sequence of actions the biochemist
performs to carry out an experiment to derive sci-
entific conclusions, to demonstrate science exper-
iments as can be seen in the experimental man-
uals (e.g., (Boyer, 2012; Sambrook and Russell,
2001)). Verbs play an essential role as indicators
of these experimental procedures. These proce-
dures can be viewed as corresponding to the el-
ements of the scientific argumentation structure.
For example, when examining a biological sub-
stance (e.g., a certain type of bacteria) in order
to prove a hypothesis (e.g., this bacteria is corre-
lated with a certain disease) the biochemist would
perform a sequence of certain procedures to ar-
rive at a conclusion. Essentially, biochemists cre-
ate an argumentation framework through the sci-
entific methodology they follow—how they per-
form their experiments is how they argue. We can
observe that this genre— biochemistry articles—is
procedure-oriented since the scientific procedures
that are described are parallel to the scientific ar-
gumentation in the text. For example:

Example 1 “Beads with bound proteins were
washed six times (for 10 min under rotation at 4
C) with pulldown buffer and proteins harvested in
SDS-sample buffer, separated by SDS-PAGE, and
analyzed by autoradiography.” (Ester and Uetz,
2008).

In this example, the verbs “washed”, “har-
vested”, “separated”, and “analyzed” are used to
illustrate the procedure steps in sequential order.
Such an experiment can be reproduced if one fol-
lows these steps.

Fillmore (1976) introduced the notion of frame
semantics as a theory of meaning. A seman-
tic frame is defined as ‘any coherent individuat-
able perception, memory, experience, action or
object’ by Fillmore (1977), in other words, co-
herently structured concepts that are related to
each other to represent a complete knowledge of
world events or experiences. For example, to un-



117

derstand the word “buy”, one would access the
knowledge contained in the commercial transac-
tion frame which includes words such as the per-
son who buys the goods (buyer), the goods that are
being sold (goods), the person who sells the goods
(seller), and the currency that the buyer and seller
agree on (money).

Following Fillmore’s theory of frame seman-
tics, FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) was developed
to create an online lexical resource for English.
This framework includes more than 170,000 man-
ually annotated sentences and 10,000 words. The
computational linguistics community has been at-
tracted to the concept of frame semantics and has
developed computational resources using this con-
cept, such as VerbNet (Schuler, 2005), an on-line
verb lexicon for English and PropBank (Palmer
et al., 2005), an annotated corpus with basic se-
mantic propositions.

Following the notion of frame semantics, we
propose to build a knowledge representation
framework to analyze verbs in a procedure-
oriented genre. Our concept of procedurally
rhetorical verb-centric frame semantics is in-
tended to address this lack of a formal framework
by developing a computationally feasible knowl-
edge representation that will enable argumentation
analysis. The knowledge contained in the frame
semantics will facilitate the extraction of elements
of arguments, i.e., argumentation mining. To reit-
erate, our hypothesis is that procedurally rhetorical
verb-centric frame semantics can provide a knowl-
edge representation framework for analyzing and
representing the meanings of the verbs used in bio-
chemistry articles. In turn, these frames will facili-
tate the identification of argumentation structure in
the discourse describing experimental procedures
by highlighting the important steps in the exper-
iment which are used to argue for the author’s
claims.

4 Annotation Scheme for Experimental
Events

We have developed a new annotation scheme for
identifying the structured representation of knowl-
edge in a set of sentences describing the experi-
mental procedures in the Method sections of bio-
chemical articles. Several researchers have devel-
oped other forms of schemes (e.g., “bio-events”
(Thompson et al., 2008)) to extract biological in-
formation (e.g., gene regulation). However, a bio-

event is different from our definition of an exper-
imental event. On the one hand, a bio-event is
concerned with detection of bio-molecular events
within the biomedical literature, such as the iden-
tification of events that are related to given pro-
teins (Thompson et al., 2008). In our case, an ex-
perimental event is concerned with processes and
procedures that are used to investigate biological
events. The experimental event is also concerned
with the recognition of the biochemist’s reasoning
of standard biochemical procedures such as using
certain instruments or specific biological materi-
als. Our annotation scheme consists of two tiers
of information. A rhetorical move is on the sen-
tence or clause level while semantic role is on the
word or phrase level. The following subsections
describe these two tiers of information.

Annotators are allowed to select the text span
for labeling units (e.g., rhetorical moves and se-
mantic roles) with some constraints as follows:

1. For a sentence or clause to be qualified as a
rhetorical move, it must include a main verb
and stand on its own. For example:

Example 2 “Beads with bound proteins
were washed six times (for 10 min under ro-
tation at 4◦C) with pulldown buffer ...” (Ester
and Uetz, 2008).

2. A sentence or clause that is qualified as a
rhetorical move, it should have at least one
or more semantic roles. Given the previous
example, one could label the sentence as fol-
lows: - “Beads with bound proteins” as a
theme - “were washed” as a predicate, - “six
times”, “for 10 min”, “under rotation”, and
“at 4◦C” as protocol-details (repetition, time,
condition, and temperature respectively).

4.1 Annotation for Rhetorical Moves
We have developed a set of rhetorical moves
following Kanoksilapatham’s (2003; 2005) work.
That is, we have adapted and modified some
of Kanoksilapatham’s moves, as well as adding
new more fine-grained moves to our annotation
scheme. In combination, there are four major
rhetorical moves concerned with the Methods sec-
tion in biochemistry articles as can be seen in Ta-
ble 1.

The clause given in Example 2, which is part
of a complete sentence that contains several verbs,
should be labeled as “Description-of-method”.



118

Move type Definition
Description-of-
method

Concerned with sentences that describe experimental events.

Appeal-to-
authority

Concerned with sentences that discuss the use of well-established meth-
ods.

Background in-
formation

Concerned with all background information for the experimental events
such as “method justification, comment, or observation, exclusion of
data, approval of use of human tissue” as defined by Kanoksilapatham
(2003).

Source-of-
materials

Concerned with the use of certain biological materials in the experimen-
tal events.

Table 1: Rhetorical Moves in the Method Sections of Biochemistry Articles

Semantic role Definition
Agent Generally a human or an animate subject.
Patient Participants that have undergone a process.
Predicate A word that initiates the frame.
Theme Participants in a location or undergoing a change of location.
Goal Identifies a thing toward which an action is directed or a place to which something

moves.
Factitive A referent that results from the action or state identified by a verb.
Location The physical place where the experiments took place.
Protocol-Detail:

Time Identifies the time or a duration of an experimental process.
Temperature Identifies the temperature of an experimental process.
Condition Identifies the condition of how an experimental process is performed.
Repetition Identifies the number of times an experimental process is repeated.
Buffer Identifies the buffer that was used in an experimental process.
Cofactor Identifies the cofactor that was used in an experimental process.

Instrument:
Change Describes objects (or forces) that come in contact with an object and cause some

change.
Measure Describes an object or protocol that can measure another object(s).
Observe Describes an object which can be used to observe another object(s).
Maintain Describes an object or protocol which can be used to maintain the state of ob-

ject(s).
Catalyst Describes an object that can be used as a catalytic “facilitator” for an experimental

event to occur.
Reference Refers to a method or protocol that is being used.
Mathematical Describes a mathematical or computational instrument

Table 2: Semantic Roles in the Annotation Scheme of our Experimental Event



119

4.2 Annotation for Semantic Roles
As described earlier, our experimental event
scheme was inspired by the annotation scheme for
bio-events (Thompson et al., 2011). We based
our experimental event scheme for verb arguments
on the inventory of semantic roles in VerbNet
(Schuler, 2005) and modified and added new se-
mantic roles to define our scheme. Our experimen-
tal event scheme includes: Theme, Patient, Predi-
cate, Agent, Location, and Goal. The complete set
of semantic roles and their definitions in our ex-
perimental event scheme is presented in Table 2.

Working with a biochemist, we have extended
the VerbNet definition of the semantic role Instru-
ment from simply “an object or force that comes in
contact with an object and causes some change in
them” (Schuler, 2005) to include a variety of sub-
categories corresponding to various types of bio-
logical and man-made instruments used in a bio-
chemistry laboratory. We have also added Pro-
tocol detail as a set of semantic roles that iden-
tify certain types of information about experimen-
tal processes such as time and temperature.

5 Annotation

5.1 Data Set
We have created a data set consisting of 105
text files. These files include only the Methods
sections from biochemistry journal articles which
were randomly selected from PubMed Central. To
prepare the data set for our task, all files were con-
verted to plain text files that included one sentence
per line and all figures and tables were omitted.
We have used this data set for our initial text anal-
ysis that we described in Section 3. We also ex-
tended our data set to include 3499 articles be-
tween the years 2013 to 2015 from the top nine
journals in biochemistry (Cell, Genome Research,
Molecular Cell, Molecular Biology and Evolution,
Molecular Aspects of Medicine, Nature Medicine,
Nature Methods, Nature Structural & Molecular
Biology, and Nature Chemical Biology).

5.2 Annotation Guidelines
We have created guidelines for annotating the
Methods section in biochemistry articles. The
guidelines include a description and the necessary
background information of the task. The guide-
lines also include examples for each type of se-
mantic role and their occurrence in the text. A list
of questions supplements the guidelines to help

annotators classify each sentence into its proper
category. This task is done for semantic role label-
ing at the word level and rhetorical move labeling
at the sentence level. We further supplemented the
guidelines with a list of common co-factors and
buffers that are normally used in the experimental
procedures. Essentially, each annotator is asked to
read the guidelines and if at any point she/he has
a question or needs clarification, we can illustrate
by providing more examples. We set up a meeting
with the annotators either by Skype or in person
to answer their questions. In fact, the guidelines
have been revised and updated several times to re-
flect the annotators’ feedback.

Our plan is to hire experts in the biomedical do-
main to label the Methods section in all of the arti-
cles in our dataset using our annotation scheme.
Due to resource limitations, only 5% of the to-
tal number of articles have been annotated by two
annotators, to date. We have hired ten annota-
tors with a variety of backgrounds (Biochemistry,
Bioinformatics, Biology) and different academic
levels ranging from Bachelor to PhD degree. The
annotators have engaged in various training ses-
sions that were led by the authors. We have pro-
vided different resources that can help and sup-
port the annotators in this project. These resources
include frequent meetings, the annotation guide-
lines, a list of questions and answers about the
annotation, our biochemistry expert (a PhD stu-
dent working with us), and the use of web-based
software called Slack6 which allows annotators to
post questions, comments, or illustrate an example
from the data set. We have also created a demo
video7 that shows annotators step by step how to
use the GATE tool8 and how to use the schema to
label texts. Annotators are asked to use the GATE
tool as an interface which gives them access to our
developed schema for the semantic roles.

Each article is labeled by two annotators. The
labeling is done on a verb basis rather than a full-
sentence basis. In other words, each sentence with
more than one verb is divided into smaller text
spans (Annotation Units (AUs)), which are com-
posed of a verb and the text containing its semantic
roles. The annotators identity the verb in that AU
and label all associated semantic roles for that verb

6https://slack.com/
7The demo video and guidelines are available at

https://uwaterloo.ca/scholar/mallihee/links/gate-annotation-
demo-and-annotation-guidelines

8https://gate.ac.uk/



120

Configuration Kappa score
Original annotation 61.3%
Theme combined with patient
and all instrument roles
combined

68.9%

Protocol details combined 71.6%
Adjudicated 93.6%

Table 3: Inter annotator agreement κ-score for seman-
tic role labeling

within that AU. The annotators decide which con-
stituent is a semantic role. Then, annotators label
the entire AU with appropriate rhetorical moves.
Each annotation is stored in an XML file. Figure
1 shows an example of some sentences annotated
for both rhetorical moves and semantic roles.

5.3 Inter-annotator Agreement

Identification of semantic roles: We measured
the inter-annotator agreement for semantic role la-
beling between the two annotations of the same
article using the κ-score (Cohen, 1960). To have
a matching label, both the semantic role category
and the text span must be the same. Then, we mea-
sured the κ-score after the adjudication step which
was done by one of the authors. The adjudication
step’s main goal is to resolve any disagreement in
annotations (Palmer et al., 2005). We have also
measured the kappa score for different configura-
tions of the data set as shown in Table 3. “Orig-
inal annotation” is the annotation that was pro-
vided by the annotators. “Theme combined with
patient and all instrument roles combined” indi-
cates theme and patient were combined as one role
and all instrument subcategories were considered
as one. “Protocol detail combined” indicates that
in addition to the previous merging of semantic
roles, all protocol detail subcategories were com-
bined as one role. “Adjudicated” means that the
disagreements in the original annotations were re-
solved and any missing semantic roles were added.
All of the κ-scores in Table 3 are rated substantial
(Landis and Koch, 1977; McHugh, 2012). The re-
sults are very promising.

Identification of rhetorical moves: We also
measured the inter-annotator agreement for rhetor-
ical move identification between the two annota-
tions of each article using the κ-score. Here again,
the rhetorical move and text span must be the same
to be considered a match. As seen in Table 4, we

Configuration Kappa score
Original 42.0%
Adjudicated 98.2%

Table 4: Inter annotator agreement κ-score for rhetori-
cal move identification

have measured the kappa-score for two configu-
rations. “Original” is the annotation provided by
the annotators, while “Adjudicated” means that the
disagreements in the original annotations were re-
solved. The Adjudicated step was done by one of
the authors. The result, shown in Table 4, shows a
moderate to almost perfect agreement (Landis and
Koch, 1977; McHugh, 2012). We have calculated
the confusion matrix for the original annotation of
rhetorical moves. During our adjudication step,
we noticed some commonly mislabeled instances
by some annotators. For example:

Example 3 “The hierarchical cluster analyses
were performed in MATLAB (Release 2012a), and
the bar graphs were produced in Microsoft Excel
2010.” (Davies et al., 2015).

This sentence should be labeled “Description-
of-method” since it clearly describes steps of the
authors’ method, i.e., using tools to perform anal-
yses and produce graphs. However, one annotator
mislabeled it as “Appeal-to-authority”.

Example 4 “Constructs comprising new opsin
sequences cloned in pMT4 were transiently trans-
fected into Neuro-2a cells with GeneJuice reagent
(Novagen), according to the manufacturer’s in-
structions (for further information, see Supple-
mental Material).” (Davies et al., 2015).

This sentence was labeled incorrectly as
“Description-of-method” whereas it should be la-
beled as “Appeal-to-authority” since it refers to an
“established” method. We have concluded that our
annotation guidelines need to be updated to bet-
ter aid our annotators to properly select the right
rhetorical move for each candidate AU.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have presented the semantic roles
that we have suggested to be necessary for this sci-
entific domain and which will be used in our anno-
tation scheme. This Experimental Event Scheme,
which is based on the proposed semantic roles,
is the first step towards developing an automated
rhetorical move analysis. We have also presented



121

Figure 1: Snippet extracted from one article (Deng et al., 2015) of our annotated dataset showing the labelling of
the rhetorical moves and semantic roles using the GATE tool.

Figure 2: Confusion matrix for rhetorical move identi-
fication.

the most common rhetorical moves based on our
observations of biochemistry procedures. We also
have described our annotation study along with
the dataset used. Ultimately, we aim to develop
a framework to analyze argumentation structure
in biochemistry procedures using the rhetorical
moves.

We note that while there is substantial agree-
ment among annotators in our results with re-
spect to semantic roles, the agreement regarding
rhetorical moves is more modest. One reason why
this might be the case is the fact that the anno-

tated dataset to date is relatively small and anno-
tators might actually have more inherent insight
into recognizing the differences between rhetori-
cal moves. Since these moves have spans which
range from clauses to full sentences, whereas se-
mantic roles are confined to at most a few words,
the guidelines for annotation that were developed
focused more on this simpler case. We antici-
pate expanding these guidelines in order to im-
prove inter-annotator agreement regarding rhetor-
ical moves in the future.

As future work, in parallel with annotating the
complete data set, we will develop a computa-
tional model to label the rhetorical moves for this
domain. As well, from our experience with an-
notating the biochemistry articles with our ex-
perts, we recognized that not all of the information
needed to interpret the move structure is available
in the text. What is needed is an ontology that
captures the knowledge that a working biochemist
would have regarding biochemistry experimental
procedures, especially the sequence of events that
are normally undertaken in these procedures. We
have begun building such an ontology and future
development will involve some automation.

Acknowledgments This research was funded
by Al Baha University and the University of Wa-
terloo. We thank our annotators for their dedica-
tion to the annotation effort.



122

References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.

1998. The Berkeley FramNnet project. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th international conference on Compu-
tational linguistics-Volume 1, pages 86–90. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Douglas Biber. 1991. Variation across speech and
writing. Cambridge University Press.

Rodney F. Boyer. 2012. Biochemistry Laboratory:
Modern Theory and Techniques. Prentice Hall.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and psychological
measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Kevin Bretonnel Cohen and Dina Demner-Fushman.
2014. Biomedical natural language processing, vol-
ume 11. John Benjamins Publishing Company.

Wayne IL Davies, T Katherine Tamai, Lei Zheng,
Josephine K Fu, Jason Rihel, Russell G Foster,
David Whitmore, and Mark W Hankins. 2015. An
extended family of novel vertebrate photopigments
is widely expressed and displays a diversity of func-
tion. Genome research, 25(11):1666–1679.

Sarah K Deng, Yi Yin, Thomas D Petes, and Lorraine S
Symington. 2015. Mre11-sae2 and rpa collaborate
to prevent palindromic gene amplification. Molecu-
lar cell, 60(3):500–508.

Claudia Ester and Peter Uetz. 2008. The ff domains
of yeast u1 snrnp protein prp40 mediate interactions
with luc7 and snu71. BMC biochemistry, 9(1):29.

Charles J Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-
ture of language. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 280(1):20–32.

Charles J Fillmore. 1977. Topics in lexical semantics.
Current issues in linguistic theory, 76:138.

Olga Gladkova. 2011. Identification of epistemic topoi
in a corpus of biomedical research articles. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Waterloo.

Nancy Green. 2014. Towards creation of a corpus for
argumentation mining the biomedical genetics re-
search literature. In Proceedings of the first work-
shop on argumentation mining, pages 11–18.

Nancy Green. 2015. Identifying argumentation
schemes in genetics research articles. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Workshop on Argumentation Mining,
pages 12–21.

Lawrence Hunter and K. Bretonnel Cohen. 2006.
Biomedical language processing: What’s beyond
pubmed? Molecular Cell, 21(5):589–594.

Budsaba Kanoksilapatham. 2003. A corpus-based
investigation of scientific research articles: Link-
ing move analysis with multidimensional analysis.
Ph.D. thesis, Georgetown University.

Budsaba Kanoksilapatham. 2005. Rhetorical structure
of biochemistry research articles. English for Spe-
cific Purposes, 24(3):269–292.

J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
biometrics, pages 159–174.

Anne Lauscher, Goran Glavaš, and Simone Paolo
Ponzetto. 2018. An argument-annotated corpus of
scientific publications. In Proceedings of the 5th
Workshop on Argument Mining, pages 40–46, Brus-
sels, Belgium. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Maria Liakata, Shyamasree Saha, Simon Dobnik,
Colin Batchelor, and Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann.
2012. Automatic recognition of conceptualization
zones in scientific articles and two life science ap-
plications. Bioinformatics, 28(7):991–1000.

Zhiyong Lu. 2011. Pubmed and beyond: a survey
of web tools for searching biomedical literature.
Database, 2011.

Mary L McHugh. 2012. Interrater reliability: the
kappa statistic. Biochemia medica: Biochemia med-
ica, 22(3):276–282.

Yoko Mizuta, Anna Korhonen, Tony Mullen, and Nigel
Collier. 2006. Zone analysis in biology articles as a
basis for information extraction. International jour-
nal of medical informatics, 75(6):468–487.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

C. Perelman and L. Olbrechts-Tyteca. 1973. The New
Rhetoric: A Treatise on Argumentation. University
of Notre Dame Press.

Joseph Sambrook and David W. Russell. 2001. Molec-
ular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2005. Verbnet: a broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.

John Swales. 1990. Genre analysis: English in aca-
demic and research settings. Cambridge University
Press.

S. Teufel. 2010. The Structure of Scientific Articles:
Applications to Citation Indexing and Summariza-
tion. CSLI Studies in Computational. Center for the
Study of Language and Information.

Simone Teufel. 2015. Scientific argumentation de-
tection as limited-domain intention recognition. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers and Con-
nections between Argumentation Theory and Nat-
ural Language Processing, volume 1341 of CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, page 9pp.

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-5206
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-5206


123

Simone Teufel, Jean Carletta, and Marc Moens. 1999.
An annotation scheme for discourse-level argumen-
tation in research articles. In Proceedings of the
ninth conference on European chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 110–
117. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2002. Summariz-
ing scientific articles: experiments with relevance
and rhetorical status. Computational linguistics,
28(4):409–445.

Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Colin Batch-
elor. 2009. Towards discipline-independent argu-
mentative zoning: Evidence from chemistry and
computational linguistics. In Proceedings of the
2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1493–1502.

Paul Thompson, Philip Cotter, John McNaught, Sophia
Ananiadou, Montemagni, Andrea Simonetta, Tra-
bucco, and Giulia Venturi. 2008. Building a bio-
event annotated corpus for the acquisition of seman-
tic frames from biomedical corpora. In Proceedings
of the Sixth International Language Resources and
Evaluation. European Language Resources Associ-
ation.

Paul Thompson, Raheel Nawaz, John McNaught, and
Sophia Ananiadou. 2011. Enriching a biomedi-
cal event corpus with meta-knowledge annotation.
BMC Bioinformatics, 12(1):393.

Stephen E Toulmin. 2003. The uses of argument. Cam-
bridge university press.

Marilyn Walker, Jean Fox Tree, Pranav Anand, Rob
Abbott, and Joseph King. 2012. A corpus for re-
search on deliberation and debate. In Proceed-
ings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012),
pages 812–817, Istanbul, Turkey. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/1078_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/1078_Paper.pdf

