



















































Unsupervised Induction of Ukrainian Morphological Paradigms for the New Lexicon: Extending Coverage for Named Entities and Neologisms using Inflection Tables and Unannotated Corpora


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 1–11,
Florence, Italy, 2 August 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1

Unsupervised Induction of Ukrainian Morphological Paradigms for the
New Lexicon: Extending Coverage for Named Entities and Neologisms

Using Inflection Tables and Unannotated Corpora

Bogdan Babych
Centre for Translation Studies

University of Leeds
UK

b.babych@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

The paper presents an unsupervised method
for quickly extending a Ukrainian lexicon by
generating paradigms and morphological fea-
ture structures for new proper names and ne-
ologisms, which are not covered by existing
static morphological resources. This approach
addresses a practical problem of modelling
paradigms for entities created by the dynamic
processes in the lexicon: this problem is es-
pecially serious for highly-inflected languages
in domains with specialised or quickly chang-
ing lexicon. The method uses an unanno-
tated Ukrainian corpus and a small fixed set
of inflection tables, which can be found in
traditional grammar textbooks. The advan-
tage of the proposed approach is that updat-
ing the morphological lexicon does not require
training or linguistic annotation, allowing fast
knowledge-light extension of an existing static
lexicon to improve morphological coverage on
a specific corpus. The method is implemented
in an open-source package on a GitHub repos-
itory. It can be applied to other low-resourced
inflectional languages which have internet cor-
pora and linguistic descriptions of their inflec-
tion system, following the example of inflec-
tion tables for Ukrainian. Evaluation results
show consistent improvements in coverage for
Ukrainian corpora of different corpus types.

1 Introduction

"Our language can be regarded as an
ancient city: a maze of little streets
and squares, of old and new houses,
of houses with extensions from various
periods, and all this surrounded by a
multitude of new suburbs with straight
and regular streets and uniform houses."
(Wittgenstein, 2009)

This metaphor from Wittgenstein’s ‘Philosophical
Investigations’ may be applied to two aspects of

the natural language lexicon, which so far have re-
ceived little attention in computational linguistics.
Firstly, like a city, the lexicon constantly evolves,
reflecting political and technical changes in the so-
ciety that take place very rapidly, so it may be in-
sufficient to design static lexical resources and to
expect that they would give the same high level
of corpus coverage once and for all: the lexi-
con needs to be constantly updated to reflect live
changes in the system. Secondly, even though
there may be many irregularities in the lexicon,
similar to ‘a maze of little streets’, this more of-
ten happens with an older lexical core, while new
words typically follow more ‘straight and regular’
patterns, so the task of updating the lexicon for
natural language applications may be facilitated
by this tendency.

This paper investigates the extent of the new
lexicon problem for different types of Ukrainian
corpora and further proposes and evaluates a
knowledge-light approach to extending lexical
coverage of morphological resources to neolo-
gisms (new words, meanings or usages) and new
single-word Named Entities (proper names) which
follow regular inflectional patterns. The scripts
and datasets which implement and evaluate the
proposed methodology are available on Github
(Babych, 2019).

Morphological annotation of the lexicon is an
important component for many natural language
processing pipelines, such as part-of-speech tag-
ging, morphological disambiguation, parsing, se-
mantic analysis, as well as for applications such
as machine translation, information extraction, ter-
minology detection, etc. For example, in part-
of-speech tagging the morphological lexicon nor-
mally supplies lemmas and associated sets of pos-
sible parts-of-speech and values of morphological
categories for each token (e.g., for Ukrainian this
would be values for the grammatical case: nom-



2

inative, genitive, dative, accusative, instrumental,
locative, vocative; number: singular, plural; gen-
der: masculine, feminine, neuter; person: 1st,
2nd, 3rd; mood: indicative, imperative, subjunc-
tive; tense: past, present, future, etc.). The tagger
then resolves any potential ambiguity using tran-
sition probabilities, trained neural networks, etc.
For any language the creation of a morphological
lexicon is difficult, because of a large number of
lexical types needed to achieve good corpus cov-
erage and also because of irregularities in word
paradigms (systems of inflected word forms, lem-
mas and associated morphological features). For
highly inflected Slavonic languages the creation of
the morphological lexicon is even more challeng-
ing, since most words have complex morphologi-
cal paradigms, which require fine-grained annota-
tion of parts-of-speech and their grammatical sub-
categories. Creation of high-quality morphologi-
cal resources for these languages often requires an
extensive effort over many years.

Like the majority of other Slavonic languages,
Ukrainian is a highly inflected language with the
‘synthetic’ grammar structure (where grammatical
relations are predominantly marked within con-
tent word forms), so the task of morphological
paradigm generation for it is not trivial. It is also
more critical for the accuracy of related tasks, such
as part-of-speech tagging, because of a larger po-
tential number of combinations of possible mor-
phological values: it is harder to guess the cor-
rect part-of-speech tag based on neighbouring tags
in the case of a missing word form. Ukrainian
paradigms for inflected parts of speech have be-
tween 7 and 28 distinct morphological feature
combinations and associated word forms for a sin-
gle lemma, and there is both regular and irreg-
ular ambiguity within and across different parts-
of-speech and lexicogrammatical classes of words
(i.e., animate vs. inanimate nouns, perfective vs.
imperfective verbs). In Ukrainian, as in other
highly-inflected languages most morphological in-
formation is supplied within the word rather than
by the context, so lexical gaps are more detrimen-
tal for correct prediction of inflected word forms
and their morphological characteristics.

For Ukrainian there exist wide-coverage lexi-
cal resources (see Section 2), however, extend-
ing them in a traditional rule-based way would in-
volve continuous annotation effort requiring lin-
guistic expertise and near-native knowledge of the

language, making it hard to keep up with most re-
cent lexical developments.

The approach proposed in this paper is designed
for the scenario where for a highly-inflected lan-
guage there exists a hand-crafted static morpho-
logical lexicon that covers potentially irregular
and more frequent lexical core. For extending this
lexicon to cover new regularly inflected entities
I use an internet corpus and small inflection ta-
bles from grammar textbooks, e.g., (Hryshchenko
et al., 1997), (Press and Pugh, 2015): such re-
sources would often be available for other low-
resourced languages, since the tasks that would
require linguistic expertise (i.e., creating the core
lexicon and inflection tables) need to be done only
once, so paradigms for new entities can be auto-
matically created whenever a new corpus becomes
available. Core static morphological lexicons have
been developed for several low-resourced lan-
guages, either as stand-alone resources or within
shared frameworks, such as Universal Dependen-
cies (Nivre et al., 2016), Apertium (Forcada et al.,
2011) (in the context of Machine Translation) or
Grammatical Framework (Ranta, 2011) (in limited
subject domains). However, the task of extend-
ing morphological lexicon in response to dynamic
processes in the lexical system, emergence of ne-
ologisms, new terminology or Named Entities has
not been systematically addressed so far.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2
I review some of the previous work in the area,
in Section 3 I describe the algorithm, datasets and
an experiment on generating paradigms, in Sec-
tion 4 I present experimental results on compara-
tive evaluation of lexical coverage on different cor-
pora for the baseline static morphological lexicon
and for the extended paradigms which cover the
new lexicon. Section 5 presents a discussion of ex-
amples of identified new entities and in Section 6
I summarise conclusion and ideas for future work.

2 Previous Work

Several projects have addressed the problem of de-
veloping the Ukrainian morphological lexicon and
morphological disambiguation strategies: (Pere-
byjnis et al., 1989), (Gryaznukhina, 1999), (Rysin
and Starko, 2019), (Kotsyba et al., 2009), (Kot-
syba et al., 2010), (Babych and Sharoff, 2016).
For the experiments presented in this paper I use
the most complete morphological toolkit from
(Rysin and Starko, 2019), which in its current



3

Corpus No of words No of sent
News 461,451,019 31,021,650
Wikipedia 185,645,357 15,786,948
Fiction 18,323,509 1,811,548
Law 578,988,264 29,208,302
Total 1,244,408,149 77,828,448

Table 1: Description of Ukrainian corpora from (Dy-
omkin et al., 2019).

implementation contains a wide-coverage lexicon:
366,846 Ukrainian lemmas, which are expanded
into 5,690,688 word forms with corresponding
morphological feature combinations.

We evaluate the coverage of this lexicon on
large Ukrainian corpora collected in lang-uk
project (Dyomkin et al., 2019), Table 1 is taken
from this source, it describes these collections.

Detailed overviews of different approaches to
developing morphological lexicons can be found
in (Ahlberg et al., 2015), (Koskenniemi et al.,
2018) and (Fam and Lepage, 2018). For our
purposes the existing approaches can be char-
acterised by their application scenarios and as-
sumptions about available datasets. Interesting
work has been done within the neural, supervised
and semi-supervised frameworks, e.g., (Ahlberg
et al., 2015), (Ahlberg et al., 2014), (Koskenniemi
et al., 2018), (Silfverberg et al., 2018), (Wolf-
Sonkin et al., 2018), (Kirov and Cotterell, 2018),
(Faruqui et al., 2016), (Faruqui et al., 2015), (Aha-
roni and Goldberg, 2016), (Cotterell et al., 2017).
Much of this work assumes availability of par-
tially labelled data, such as word paradigms and/or
clean datasets, such as lists of ‘headwords’ (lem-
mas) from which paradigms are generated. (Fam
and Lepage, 2018) identify three main approaches
to learning morphological inflection: the hand-
engineered rule-based approach, which requires
much cost and time for construction, the super-
vised approach, which relies on initial labelled
datasets and the neural approach, which needs
more training time and even more data. However,
for low-resource scenarios more attention need to
be given to unsupervised knowledge-light meth-
ods, which could make strong assumptions, e.g.,
based on compact linguistic descriptions of the in-
flection systems, but for the most part rely only un-
labelled data or resources that would be typically
available for low-resource languages.

A terminological note: in several papers, such

as (Ahlberg et al., 2015), (Silfverberg et al., 2018),
the term ‘paradigm’ is used to describe a gener-
alised inflection pattern, which could apply to a
class of words, while the term ‘inflection table’
characterises an individual system of inflection for
a single word. This usage differs from the tradi-
tional understanding of the notion of a paradigm
as a system of word forms for a given word, see
e.g., (Spencer, 2001). In this paper I adhere to
the traditional terminological usage for the term
‘paradigm’ as a system of word forms, and use the
term ‘inflection tables’ referring only to tables of
inflections, which may be attached to a class of
stems.

The problem of characterising dynamic pro-
cesses in the Ukrainian lexicon has been discussed
in (Klymenko et al., 2008), (Karpilovs’ka et al.,
2008), where these changes are attributed to polit-
ical, cultural and technical developments in the so-
ciety – the active ‘social dynamics’, which causes
the active ‘linguistic dynamics’: renewal and addi-
tions to nominative and communicative resources
of the language and changes in linguistic norms.
While the grammar or phonology remain more
conservative, the lexicon is very open to such
changes. There is an ongoing work to record these
lexical developments for Ukrainian and other lan-
guages, however, so far there is no systematic
computational linguistic framework for modelling
morphological features and inflections for neolo-
gisms and new Named Entities.

3 Algorithm Description

The proposed algorithm uses small set of inflec-
tion tables for inflected parts-of-speech which
accepts new entities (i.e., nouns, adjectives and
verbs, but not numerals or pronouns, which are
closed class entities) and unannotated corpus (or
a frequency list compiled from such a corpus).
It attempts to split each token in the corpus into
its stem and inflection using all inflections in all
available inflection tables. When a split is suc-
cessful, it generates a full hypothetical paradigm
consistent with the split, using the identified stem
and all other inflections for the given table. Then
these hypotheses are checked against available
word forms in the corpus: whether a sufficient
number of forms can be found to confirm the
hypothetical paradigm. In this approach for
the paradigms to be generated reliably, the new
entities need to have a sufficient morphological



4

Figure 1: Algorithm description.

diversity in the corpus: it has been experimentally
established that at least 3 or 4 different word forms
are needed to make a reasonably accurate predic-
tion of a paradigm and its remaining unseen word
forms. For confirmed paradigms the algorithm
generates all remaining word forms, their lemma
(as a designated ‘dictionary’ word form in the
paradigm, e.g., the nominative singular form for
nouns) and their sets of morphological category
values associated with inflections, based on the
expected structure of the paradigm. Multiple splits
of a token are possible, so hypothetical paradigms
are ranked by the number of confirmed word
forms, and the paradigm with the highest number
is selected among the competing paradigms.
Figure 1 shows the general overview of the algo-
rithm. Scripts are released on GitHub repository:
https://github.com/bogdanbabych/
paralex4morphosyntax.

For a general case to cover less regular
paradigms with stem alternations the algorithm
may be complemented with a distortion model
which modifies tested tokens and hypothetical
word forms according to morphonological rules of
the language, for Ukrainian this would cover his-
torical alternations such as [o,e] -> [i] in ‘newly
closed’ syllables, e.g., [kon’a] (horse.Gen.sing) -
> [kin’] (horse.Nom.sing), [h, k, x] before [i] ->
[z, ts, s], e.g., [ruka] (hand.Nom.sing) -> [rutsi]
(hand.Dat.sing), etc.

The example in Figure 2 illustrates working of
the algorithm. In this example I assume that the
current token is рука (ruka = ‘hand’), for which
the algorithm will try to generate paradigms. In

this dataset I have inflection tables for the ‘hard’,
‘soft’, ‘iotated’ and ‘mixed’ groups of the 1st dec-
lination of nouns, taken from a Ukrainian gram-
mar textbook (Hryshchenko et al., 1997): фа-
брика, робiтниця, надiя, площа (fabryka =
‘factory’, robitnyts’a = ‘worker’, nadija = ‘hope’,
ploshcha = ‘town square’): I use only inflection
sets and morphological values from these tables
(the stems in the inflection tables are only for il-
lustration).

In the first stage the algorithm tries every in-
flection in every table to split the current token
(’ruka’). A possible split is found in the inflec-
tion table for the 1st declination of nouns, for the
‘hard’ and ‘mixed’ groups illustrated by examples
‘fabryka’ and ‘ploshcha’. The split separates the
stem ’ruk’ and the inflection ’a’.

In the second stage, trying the split for the
‘hard’ group, the word form hypotheses are gen-
erated from the inflection table: ruk+y, ruk+u,
ruk+oju, ruk-o, ruk, ruk+amy, ruk+ax and with
the distortion model: [k] /_[i] -> [ts] – ruts+i. For
the split defined by the ‘mixed’ group inflection
table, in addition two incorrect word forms will
be generated *ruk+eju, *ruk-e, but the following
three correct forms will not be generated: ruk-y,
ruk-oju, ruk-o. Therefore, two paradigms for the
split ruk|a will be competing with each other.

In the third stage, each of the competing
paradigms will be verified against the corpus: in
this example, for the ‘hard’ group the following
four hypothesised word forms are actually found:
ruk, ruk+am, ruk+ax, ruk+y, which, together with
the 5th original form ruk+a, correspond to 7 mor-
phological feature combinations, since ruk+y is
ambiguous having three interpretations. While for
the ‘mixed’ group only three hypothesised forms
will be confirmed + initial ruk+a = 4, because the
existing form ruk+y has not been predicted by the
‘mixed’ paradigm. As a result, the correct ‘hard’
paradigm will be ranked higher, with 5 confirmed
word form hypotheses vs. 4 confirmed hypothe-
ses for the wrong ‘mixed’ paradigm. When the
corpus gets larger, more clues may differentiate
such closely competing paradigms and more cor-
rect rankings may be produced.

In the fourth stage the top-ranking paradigm
is confirmed and previously unseen word forms
are generated, as well as possible part-of-speech
code, lemma and all possible morphological fea-
ture combinations for both seen and unseen word

https://github.com/bogdanbabych/paralex4morphosyntax
https://github.com/bogdanbabych/paralex4morphosyntax


5

Figure 2: Illustration of the algorithm.

forms, such as values for case, number, gender,
e.g., the unseen word form ruk+u will be gener-
ated with its morphological information ruk-u :
lem=ruka; PoS=N.acc.sing, etc.

Note that for a single token it is not possible
to clearly distinguish between a competing
wrong paradigm and an alternative legitimate
paradigm, which corresponds to a different
reading of an ambiguous word form. For
example, the word form pryklad|y belongs
both to PoS=N.nom.plur; lemma=pryklad
(‘example’) and to PoS=V.imper.pers2.sing;
lemma=pryklasty/pryklad+u (‘to attach’). The
limitation of the algorithm is that only one of
these correct paradigms is confirmed for the given
word form pryklady, depending on how many
hypothesised word forms are found in corpus for
each of the verbal or nominal paradigms. How-
ever, the same paradigm is confirmed via different
routes, i.e., through splitting other word forms
belonging to the same paradigm, e.g., in Figure 2
the paradigm for lemma=ruka, PoS=N will be
also confirmed via splitting the corpus tokens
ruk|am, ruk|amy, ruk|ax. This gives the proposed
algorithm an advantage, compared to the approach
described in (Ahlberg et al., 2015) for the case

of overlapping paradigms with ambiguous word
forms: alternative readings will be confirmed by
the tokens in corpus which are unique for each
of the alternative paradigms, e.g., pryklad+ut’
(‘they will attach’) vs. pryklad+om (‘with an
example’). Interestingly, ambiguous word forms
are not discarded: when unambiguous tokens
are split for each of the overlapping paradigms,
the ambiguous tokens will count in both cases to
confirm both of the correct paradigms. This will
not happen for competing wrong paradigms: their
wrong word form predictions (such as *ruk+eju
in the example above) will simply not be found in
corpus, so they will not initiate the process for the
alternative paradigm.

For the purposes of this experiment I evalu-
ate the coverage given by the algorithm without
a distortion model, as such alternations are more
typical for the older lexicon and often do not
occur in recently borrowed items, e.g. [portu]
(port.Gen.sing) - port (port.Nom.sing): [o] -> [i]
alternation does not take place, as the word was
borrowed after the phonological law of the ‘open
syllable’ no longer worked in Ukrainian. How-
ever, in future the distortion models may be learnt
from data or directly coded as explicit linguistic



6

Corpus No of generated word forms
dict_uk 5,690,688
News 3,292,591
Wikipedia 3,765,774
Fiction 958,233
Law 1,788,288
All corpora 6,626,004

Table 2: Size of lexicon extracted from corpora.

knowledge, and in this way the older paradigms
and live stem alternations may also be covered.

4 Evaluating Algorithm with Corpus
Coverage

The algorithm is used for extending the Ukrainian
morphological lexicon from four corpora: news,
wikipedia, law and fiction, and from a combined
corpus that merges these four corpora. Table 2
shows the number of word forms extracted from
each of the corpora presented in Table 1.

We measure the coverage (in terms of lexical
types) in four corpora and in the merged cor-
pus, with gradually filtering out lower frequency
ranges. The rationale for this evaluation method is
that it is usually harder for the lexicon to cover
low-frequent items, so I test this lexicons on a
range of tasks of varying difficulty.

Another important aspect of evaluation would
be the accuracy of the generated paradigms,
e.g., the proportion of correctly generated entries,
which in this paper is evaluated only indirectly,
as the coverage on previously unseen corpus, as
correctly generated paradigms should cover more
types in the unseen corpora. Direct evaluation of
accuracy will be a matter of future work, as it re-
quires systematic sampling for different frequency
ranges and more extensive manual annotation ef-
fort, which is beyond the scope of this paper.

Note that the accuracy evaluation for the algo-
rithm would require a more complex potentially
multidimensional metric, which would need to ad-
dress the following aspects of accuracy: (a) cor-
rectness of the whole paradigm vs. correctness of
individual forms and morphological codes, such
as the case labels for animate vs. inanimate nouns
that, e.g., may overlap in accusative and genitive
or nominative, depending on this morphological
category; (b) partial overlaps of sub-paradigms,
e.g., soft, hard and mixed phonological groups, or
the regular masculine vs. neuter overlap in sev-

Figure 3: The baseline: Percent of non-covered types
(y) in dict_uk lexicon, with filtered out lower frequen-
cies, up to (x).

eral indirect case values in nominal and adjecti-
val paradigms, etc.; (c) defective paradigms and
potential word forms; (d) morphological variants
in paradigms; (e) word forms determined by inde-
pendent parameters but not by the paradigm-wide
inflection class, e.g., vocative case in Ukrainian;
(f) different impact of errors in paradigms, de-
pending on syntagmatic frequency, which may
be determined stylistically, grammatically or lexi-
cally (e.g., the imperative is less frequent in narra-
tive texts, so imperative errors should be counted
as less serious then errors in more common 3rd-
person-singular forms).

Even though the accuracy evaluation would be
important for understanding theoretical value of
the proposed approach, it is less relevant for the
practical scenario of updating the morphological
lexicon for specialised domain, compared to the
evaluation of coverage: incorrect (overgenerated)
word forms in paradigms normally should not
cause any additional errors compared to the base-
line, as they would simply not match, the same as
without the added lexicon.

As the baseline, Figure 3 shows the coverage of
the existing static lexicon from the dict_uk project
developed by (Rysin and Starko, 2019) (also char-
acterised in the first row in Table 2). The horizon-
tal axis indicates which frequency range has been
filtered out. (Note the change of scale in the mid-
dle of the graph from 1 to 10 in one unit of length).

It can be seen from the figure that the Wikipedia
corpus that contains many Named Entities and
specialised terminology is the most problematic in
terms of coverage: up to 80% of its types are not
covered, which goes down only to around 50% if
the frequency threshold is reduced to 10. At the
same time a ‘static’ corpus of fiction texts is cov-



7

Figure 4: Percent of non-covered types (y) in Wiki cor-
pus, with dict_uk (‘wiki’ line), with only proposed al-
gorithm and paradigms generated from News corpus
(‘Par(w)’ line), and with the two morphological lexi-
cons combined (wiki+Par(w) line); filtered out lower
frequencies, up to (x).

Figure 5: Percent of non-covered types (y) in Wiki
corpus, with dict_uk (‘wiki’ line), with only proposed
algorithm and paradigms generated from Law corpus
(‘Par(w)’ line), and with the two morphological lexi-
cons combined (wiki+Par(w) line); filtered out lower
frequencies, up to (x).

ered the best by the existing morphological lexi-
con.

We evaluate the effect of the proposed algorithm
via measuring improvements in coverage of lexi-
cal types across the frequency ranges for filtered
out items. I use different corpora for the devel-
opment and evaluation, so the following figures
show the corpus coverage for these different com-
binations (lower lines indicate better results). Fig-
ure 4 and Figure 5 show coverage levels for the
Wiki corpus with paradigms generated from the
News and Law corpora respectively. Figure 6 and
Figure 7 show coverage for the News corpus with
paradigms developed from the Wiki and Law cor-
pora. Finally, Figure 8 and Figure 9 show cov-
erage for the Law corpus with paradigms devel-
oped from the Wiki and News corpora. In these
figures the baseline graphs labelled ‘wiki’, ‘news’
and ‘law’ are the same as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 6: Percent of non-covered types (y) in News
corpus, with dict_uk (‘news’ line), with only proposed
algorithm and paradigms generated from Wiki corpus
(‘Par(n)’ line), and with the two morphological lexi-
cons combined (news+Par(n) line); filtered out lower
frequencies, up to (x).

Figure 7: Percent of non-covered types (y) in News
corpus, with dict_uk (‘news’ line), with only proposed
algorithm and paradigms generated from Law corpus
(‘Par(n)’ line), and with the two morphological lexi-
cons combined (news+Par(n) line); filtered out lower
frequencies, up to (x).

Figure 8: Percent of non-covered types (y) in Law cor-
pus, with dict_uk (‘law’ line), with only proposed al-
gorithm and paradigms generated from Wiki corpus
(‘Par(l)’ line), and with the two morphological lexicons
combined (law+Par(l) line); filtered out lower frequen-
cies, up to (x).



8

Figure 9: Percent of non-covered types (y) in Law cor-
pus, with dict_uk (‘law’ line), with only proposed al-
gorithm and paradigms generated from News corpus
(‘Par(l)’ line), and with the two morphological lexicons
combined (law+Par(l) line); filtered out lower frequen-
cies, up to (x).

Figure 10: Improvement rates (y), of different corpora
with the paradigms generated from New corpus; fil-
tered out lower frequencies, up to (x).

It can be seen from the figures that for the pro-
posed algorithm the morphological and lexical di-
versity of the corpus are essential: the Law cor-
pus has very little effect on the coverage of both
News and Wikipedia corpora, while the News and
Wikipedia consistently improve the coverage of all
the corpora on which they are evaluated. This may
be due to the small type/token ratio (i.e., small lex-
ical diversity) of the Law corpus.

Finally, Figures 10 and 11 summarise improve-
ment rates (i.e., the difference between the base-
line and the proposed approach) for all the corpora
using the News and Wiki corpora for generating
paradigms.

It can be seen from these figures that the cover-
age of Fiction and Law corpora is harder to im-
prove, while News and Wiki corpora are most
complementary, improving each other well. Also
an interesting effect can be observed when a cor-
pus is used to improve itself: the improvement rate
peaks at the value of filtered frequencies up to 4,

Figure 11: Improvement rates (y), of different corpora
with the paradigms generated from Wiki corpus; fil-
tered out lower frequencies, up to (x).

which may be interpreted as improvement in re-
liability of paradigm prediction for more frequent
items, and as an indication of a possible thresh-
old for the minimal number of slots for predicting
Ukrainian paradigms.

The results indicate that the proposed approach
gives consistent improvements in coverage with
paradigms generated from a lexically diverse cor-
pora with sufficient number of neologisms and
new proper names. The highest improvement rates
across different corpora has been achieved for
paradigms generated from the Wiki corpus used
to test the News corpus – 16.3% for lexical items
with frequencies 10 and higher.

5 Discussion

The algorithm proposed in this paper uses the fun-
damental idea that “the existence of a hypothetical
lemma can be guessed if several different words
found in the corpus are best interpreted as mor-
phological variants of this lemma" (Clément et al.,
2004). This idea has been developed for auto-
mated induction of morphological lexica for dif-
ferent languages and implemented in practical ap-
plications such as spell checking (e.g., ispell) and
information retrieval systems: (Krovetz, 1993),
(Grefenstette et al., 2002), (Segalovich, 2003),
(Clément et al., 2004), (Oliver and Tadić, 2004),
(Sagot, 2005); recent work in this area uses more
accurate machine learning approaches: (Šnajder,
2013), (Ljubešić et al., 2015).

The approach proposed in this paper develops
these ideas further by explicitly focussing on the
following conceptual points:

(1) The extracted units are paradigms, and not
lemmas or mappings from inflected word forms
to lemmas or paradigms. The advantage of such



9

approach is that inflected word forms in the cor-
pus provide only indirect, latent justification for
the existence of paradigms, so there is a separa-
tion between a form which initiates generation of
hypotheses and those (possibly ambiguous) word
forms that are used as evidence: they can inde-
pendently justify the existence of several differ-
ent paradigms, which avoids the artificial pres-
sure to choose a single top-ranked paradigm and
lemma for each inflected form, as it is the case in
(Oliver and Tadić, 2004) or (Ahlberg et al., 2014).
This latent paradigm induction is also more robust
against potential noise in the corpus, since mis-
spellings would not normally collect enough in-
flected forms.

(2) The proposed approach focusses only on
the regular dynamic component of the lexicon,
which enables a clean separation between the core
method of the paradigm induction and the exten-
sions or other methods needed to address histor-
ical or irregular features, such as stem alterna-
tions or suppletive forms, for which separate dis-
tortion models can be developed or learnt from
corpora. Also the inflection tables for generat-
ing paradigms hypotheses are derived from com-
prehensive grammatical descriptions rather than
from potentially noisy data. This reflects a typ-
ical scenario of morphological lexicon develop-
ment for many under-resourced languages, which
still have a smaller dictionary that covers most fre-
quent items and comprehensive inflection tables in
traditional grammars, but where it is hard to re-
cruit language specialists on a recurrent basis to
keep up with constant lexical developments in dif-
ferent subject domains of the language for which
applications need to be developed or updated.

(3) Evaluation in the proposed approach is part
of the development workflow: it focusses on the
dynamics of corpus coverage with generated word
forms for different maximum frequency thresh-
olds. Such comprehensive automated evaluation
indicates on the large scale where maximal im-
provement in coverage can be expected, so which
frequencies can be used as cut-off points to filter
out noisier and less reliable paradigms.

Most lexical items covered with the proposed
paradigm generation algorithm are single-word
Named Entities – names of organisations, geo-
graphical places or people, as well as techni-
cal terms, e.g.: мiнохоронздоров’я (‘The
Ministry of Health’) iнтербiзнесконсалтинг

(‘Internet business consulting’), кременчу-
км’ясо (‘The Meat of Kremenchuk’ company),
кривбасводопостачання (‘Kryvbas Water Sup-
ply’), броваритепловодоенергiя (‘Brovary
Heating, Water and Energy’ company), могадi-
шо (‘Mogadishu’) озоноруйнуючих . (‘ozone-
destroying’).

However, the list also contains interesting polit-
ical lexicon, such as йолка (‘Christmas tree’:
the distorted ukrainized spelling of the Russian
word, which became a symbol of the people’s re-
sistance to political violence during the Ukrainian
revolution of dignity in 2013-2014) and проффе-
сор (again, a distorted spelling of the word ‘pro-
fessor’, which was used for mocking the fugitive
pro-Russian president, who held this title, but al-
legedly misspelt it in an official document).

The appearance of this politically charged lexi-
con is in line with Karpilovs’ka et al.’s (2008) sug-
gestion that lexical changes are driven by the so-
cial dynamics, especially at the times of major po-
litical developments. However, it can be also seen
that this political lexicon is still much less frequent
and less changeable compared to Named Entities,
which dominate the new lexicon.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

The proposed algorithm complements static lin-
guistic resources and increases corpus coverage
for new entities, such as neologisms and proper
names. The highest improvements are achieved
for the corpus types that typically have many ne-
ologisms, specialised terminological lexicon and
Named Entities: the Wikipedia and News. These
corpora are not well covered by existing morpho-
logical resources. The advantage of the proposed
approach is that it uses unlabelled corpora and
small inflection tables for unsupervised induction
of paradigms. However, its limitation is that in this
stage it doesn’t predict irregular paradigms.

Future work will involve the development of
distortion models to cover less regular cases and a
systematic evaluation of the accuracy of paradigm
prediction for different frequency ranges: while
for more frequent items such prediction is highly
reliable, there is a need to experimentally estab-
lish frequency and coverage thresholds for differ-
ent error rates on this task for less frequent items.
Another area for future research is the use of con-
textual and syntactic features to verify predicted
morphological properties.



10

References
Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Morphologi-

cal inflection generation with hard monotonic atten-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01487.

Malin Ahlberg, Markus Forsberg, and Mans Hulden.
2014. Semi-supervised learning of morphological
paradigms and lexicons. In Proceedings of the 14th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 569–578.

Malin Ahlberg, Markus Forsberg, and Mans Hulden.
2015. Paradigm classification in supervised learning
of morphology. In Proceedings of the 2015 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 1024–1029.

Bogdan Babych. 2019. Induction of morphologi-
cal and syntactic models for under-resourced lan-
guages. GitHub repository. https://github.
com/bogdanbabych/morphosyntax.

Bogdan Babych and Serge Sharoff. 2016. Ukrainian
part-of-speech tagger for hybrid MT: Rapid in-
duction of morphological disambiguation resources
from a closely related language. In Fifth Work-
shop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra).
EAMT, Riga: June 1st 2016.

Lionel Clément, Bernard Lang, and Benoît Sagot.
2004. Morphology based automatic acquisition of
large-coverage lexica. In LREC 04, pages 1841–
1844.

Ryan Cotterell, Ekaterina Vylomova, Huda Khayral-
lah, Christo Kirov, and David Yarowsky. 2017.
Paradigm completion for derivational morphology.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.09151.

Vsevolod Dyomkin, Dmytro Chaplinskyi, Ana-
toliy Stegnii, Oleksandr Marikovskyi, Viach-
eslav Tykhonov, Oles Petriv, Serhii Shekhovtsov,
Mykhailo Chalyi, Tetiana Kodliuk, Mykyta Pavli-
uchenko, Oksana Kunikevych, and Khrystyna
Skopyk. 2019. lang-uk. GitHub repository. http:
//lang.org.ua/en/corpora/#anchor4.

Rashel Fam and Yves Lepage. 2018. IPS-WASEDA
system at CoNLL-SIGMORPHON 2018 Shared
Task on morphological inflection. Proceedings of
the CoNLL SIGMORPHON 2018 Shared Task: Uni-
versal Morphological Reinflection, pages 33–42.

Manaal Faruqui, Ryan McDonald, and Radu Soricut.
2016. Morpho-syntactic lexicon generation using
graph-based semi-supervised learning. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 4:1–16.

Manaal Faruqui, Yulia Tsvetkov, Graham Neubig, and
Chris Dyer. 2015. Morphological inflection genera-
tion using character sequence to sequence learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.06110.

Mikel L Forcada, Mireia Ginestí-Rosell, Jacob Nord-
falk, Jim O’Regan, Sergio Ortiz-Rojas, Juan An-
tonio Pérez-Ortiz, Felipe Sánchez-Martínez, Gema
Ramírez-Sánchez, and Francis M Tyers. 2011.
Apertium: a free/open-source platform for rule-
based machine translation. Machine translation,
25(2):127–144.

Gregory Grefenstette, Yan Qu, and David Evans. 2002.
Expanding lexicons by inducing paradigms and val-
idating attested forms. In LREC 2002.

Tetiana O. Gryaznukhina, editor. 1999. Syntactic anal-
ysis of scientific texts on computers. / Sintaksicheskiy
analiz nauchnogo teksta na EVM. Naukova Dumka,
Kyiv, Ukraine.

Arnold P. Hryshchenko, Liubov I. Matsko, Mariya Ja.
Pliushch, Nina I. Totska, and Ivanna M. Uzdy-
han. 1997. Modern Ukrainian Literary Langauge
/ Suchasna Ukrajins’ka Literaturna Mova. Vyshcha
Shkola, Kyiv.

Yevheniya A. Karpilovs’ka, Larysa P. Kysliuk, Nina F.
Klymenko, Valentyna I. Kryts’ka, Tetiana K.
Puzdyr’eva, and Yuliya V. Romaniuk. 2008. Ac-
tive resources of modern Ukranian nomination.
Ideographic dictionary of the new lexicon / Ak-
tyvni resursy suchasnoji Ukrajins’koji nominatsiji:
Ideohrafichnyj slovnyk novoji leksyky. KMM, Kyiv.

Christo Kirov and Ryan Cotterell. 2018. Recurrent
neural networks in linguistic theory: Revisiting
pinker and prince (1988) and the past tense debate.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 6:651–665.

Nina F. Klymenko, Yevheniya A. Karpilovs’ka, and
Larysa P. Kysliuk. 2008. Dynamic processes in the
modern Ukrainian lexicon / Dynamichni protsesy v
suchasnomu ukrajins’komu leksykoni. Vydavnychyi
Dim Dmytra Burago.

Kimmo Matti Koskenniemi et al. 2018. Guessing lex-
icon entries using finite-state methods. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourth International Workshop on Com-
putatinal Linguistics for Uralic Languages. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Natalia Kotsyba, Andriy Mykulyaky, and Igor
Shevchenko. 2009. UGTag: morphological analyzer
and tagger for the Ukrainian language. In Proceed-
ings of the international conference Practical Appli-
cations in Language and Computers (PALC 2009).

Natalia Kotsyba, Igor Shevchenko, Ivan Derzhan-
ski, and Andriy Mykulyak. 2010. MULTEXT-
East Morphosyntactic Specifications, version 4.
3.11 url: http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V4/msd/
html/msd-uk.html.

Robert Krovetz. 1993. Viewing morphology as an in-
ference process. In Proceedings of the 16th an-
nual international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval,
pages 191–202. ACM.

https://github.com/bogdanbabych/morphosyntax
https://github.com/bogdanbabych/morphosyntax
https://github.com/bogdanbabych/morphosyntax
https://github.com/bogdanbabych/morphosyntax
https://github.com/bogdanbabych/morphosyntax
https://github.com/lang-uk/lang.org.ua
http://lang.org.ua/en/corpora/#anchor4
http://lang.org.ua/en/corpora/#anchor4
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V4/msd/html/msd-uk.html
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V4/msd/html/msd-uk.html
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V4/msd/html/msd-uk.html
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V4/msd/html/msd-uk.html
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V4/msd/html/msd-uk.html
http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V4/msd/html/msd-uk.html


11

Nikola Ljubešić, Miquel Espla-Gomis, Filip Klubička,
and Nives Mikelić Preradović. 2015. Predicting
inflectional paradigms and lemmata of unknown
words for semi-automatic expansion of morpholog-
ical lexicons. In Proceedings of the International
Conference Recent Advances in Natural Language
Processing, pages 379–387.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Filip
Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D
Manning, Ryan T McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo
Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira, et al. 2016. Universal De-
pendencies v1: A multilingual treebank collection.
In LREC.

Antoni Oliver and Marko Tadić. 2004. Enlarging the
Croatian morphological lexicon by automatic lexi-
cal acquisition from raw corpora. In Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation LREC2004. ELRA.

Valentyna S. Perebyjnis, Nataliya P. Darchuk, and
Tetiana O. Gryaznukhina. 1989. Morphological
analysis of scientific texts on computers / Mor-
fologicheskiy analiz nauchnogo teksta na EVM.
Naukova Dumka, Kyiv, Ukraine.

Ian Press and Stefan Pugh. 2015. Ukrainian: A com-
prehensive grammar. Routledge.

Aarne Ranta. 2011. Grammatical framework: Pro-
gramming with multilingual grammars, volume 173.
CSLI Publications, Center for the Study of Lan-
guage and Information Stanford.

Andriy Rysin and Vasyl Starko. 2019. Project to
generate pos tag dictionary for Ukrainian language.
GitHub repository. https://github.com/
brown-uk/dict_uk.

Benoît Sagot. 2005. Automatic acquisition of a Slovak
lexicon from a raw corpus. In International Confer-
ence on Text, Speech and Dialogue, pages 156–163.
Springer.

Ilya Segalovich. 2003. A fast morphological algorithm
with unknown word guessing induced by a dictio-
nary for a web search engine. In MLMTA, pages
273–280. Citeseer.

Miikka Silfverberg, Ling Liu, and Mans Hulden. 2018.
A computational model for the linguistic notion of
morphological paradigm. In Proceedings of the
27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 1615–1626.

Jan Šnajder. 2013. Models for predicting the inflec-
tional paradigm of Croatian words. Slovenšcina,
20:1–34.

Andrew Spencer. 2001. The paradigm-based model of
morphosyntax. Transactions of the Philological So-
ciety, 99(2):279–314.

Ludwig Wittgenstein. 2009. Philosophical investiga-
tions. Wiley-Blackwell.

Lawrence Wolf-Sonkin, Jason Naradowsky, Sebas-
tian J Mielke, and Ryan Cotterell. 2018. A
structured variational autoencoder for contex-
tual morphological inflection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.03746.

https://github.com/brown-uk/dict_uk
https://github.com/brown-uk/dict_uk
https://github.com/brown-uk/dict_uk
https://github.com/brown-uk/dict_uk

