



















































First Steps towards Building a Medical Lexicon for Spanish with Linguistic and Semantic Information


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2019 workshop, pages 152–164
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

152

First Steps towards a Medical Lexicon for Spanish
with Linguistic and Semantic Information

Leonardo Campillos-Llanos
Computational Linguistics Laboratory, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid

leonardo.campillos@uam.es

Abstract

We report the work-in-progress of collecting
MedLexSp, an unified medical lexicon for
the Spanish language, featuring terms and in-
flected word forms mapped to Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) Concept Unique
Identifiers (CUIs), semantic types and groups.
First, we leveraged a list of term lemmas and
forms from a previous project, and mapped
them to UMLS terms and CUIs. To en-
rich the lexicon, we used both domain-corpora
(e.g. Summaries of Product Characteristics
and MedlinePlus) and natural language pro-
cessing techniques such as string distance
methods or generation of syntactic variants of
multi-word terms. We also added term vari-
ants by mapping their CUIs to missing items
available in the Spanish versions of standard
thesauri (e.g. Medical Subject Headings and
World Health Organization Adverse Drug Re-
actions terminology). We enhanced the vo-
cabulary coverage by gathering missing terms
from resources such as the Anatomical Thera-
peutical Classification, the National Cancer In-
stitute (NCI) Dictionary of Cancer Terms, Or-
phaData, or the Nomenclátor de Prescripción
for drug names. Part-of-Speech information
is being included in the lexicon, and the cur-
rent version amounts up to 76 454 lemmas and
203 043 inflected forms (including conjugated
verbs, number and gender variants), corre-
sponding to 30 647 UMLS CUIs. MedLexSp
is distributed freely for research purposes.

1 Introduction

Current machine-learning and deep-learning-
based methods are data-intensive; however, in do-
mains such as Medicine, sufficient data are not al-
ways available—due to ethical concerns or privacy
issues, especially when dealing with Patient Pro-
tected Information. Moreover, some tasks demand
high precision outcomes, which either need super-
vised approaches with annotated data or hybrid

methods (e.g. rule-based and dictionary-based).
In order to overcome the data bottleneck, richly-
structured terminological thesauri enhance the an-
notation and concept normalization of domain cor-
pora to be used subsequently in supervised mod-
els. More importantly, to achieve comparable
benchmarks, domain resources should integrate
standard terminologies and coding schemes.

In this context, we aim at providing a computa-
tional lexicon to be used in the pre-processing of
text data used in more complex Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks. The work here presented
reports the first steps towards building the Medi-
cal Lexicon for Spanish (MedLexSp). MedLexSp
is conceived as an unified resource with linguis-
tic information (lemmas, inflected forms and part-
of-speech), concepts mapped to Unified Medical
Language System R© (hereafter, UMLS) (Boden-
reider, 2004) Concept Unique Identifiers (CUIs),
and semantic information (UMLS types and
groups). Figure 1 is a sample of the lexicon.
MedLexSp is firstly aimed at named entity recog-
nition (NER), and it can be used in the pre-
annotation step of an NER pipeline. It can also
help lemmatization and feed general-purpose Part-
of-Speech taggers applied to medical texts—as
done in previous works (Oronoz et al., 2013).1 Be-
cause it gathers semantic data of terms, it can ease
relation extraction tasks.

Our work makes several contributions. We
provide a resource to be distributed for research
purposes in the BioNLP community. MedLexSp
includes inflected forms (singular/plural, mascu-
line/feminine) and conjugated verb forms of term
lemmas, which are mapped to UMLS Concept
Unique Identifiers. Verb terms are also mapped
to Concept Unique Identifiers; this is the line of
current works for expanding terminologies by in-

1https://zenodo.org/record/2621286

https://zenodo.org/record/2621286


153

Figure 1: Sample of the MedLexSp lexicon. In each entry, field 1 is the UMLS CUI of the entity; field 2, the lemma;
field 3, the variant forms; field 4, the Part-of-Speech; field 5, the semantic types(s); and field 6, the semantic group.

cluding verb terms (Thompson et al., 2011; Chiu
et al., 2019). We also added inflected terms
from MedlinePlus terms, OrphaData (INSERM,
2019), the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Dic-
tionary of Cancer Terms, or the Nomenclator de
prescripción (AEMPS, 2019), a knowledge base
of medical drugs prescribed in Spain.

Section 2 gives an overview of medical thesauri,
and Section 3 describes the methods used to gather
terms (both corpora and NLP techniques), map
them to UMLS CUIs, and enrich the lexicon. Sec-
tion 4 reports descriptive statistics of the current
version, and Section 5, the results of an evaluation
conducted during development. We discuss some
limitations and conclude in Section 6.

2 Background and Context

2.1 Health thesauri and taxonomies

Medical thesauri and controlled vocabularies ag-
gregate listings of domain terms, and also gather
information about the type of term (e.g. syn-
onym or preferred term), a semantic descriptor
(e.g. DRUG or FINDING), an unique concept iden-
tifier, and very often a term definition or hier-
archical relations between concepts (e.g. IS A).
Thesauri are essential for indexing and populating
databases, domain-specific information retrieval,
and standardized codification (Cimino, 1996).

Medical thesauri vary according to the applica-
tion (we only give examples related to our work).
The Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine
Clinical Terms (SNOMED-CT) (Donnelly, 2006)
aims at encoding verbatim mentions in clinical
texts, and gathers ontological relations between
concepts. To report drug reactions in pharma-
covigilance, the World Health Organization cre-
ated the Adverse Reactions Terminology (WHO
ART), although the Medical Dictionary for Regu-
latory Activities (MedDRA) (Brown et al., 1999)
is now preferred. The Medical Subject Headings

(MeSH) are developed by the National Library of
Medicine for indexing biomedical articles. Lastly,
the World Organization of Family Doctors pro-
duced the International Classification of Primary
Care (ICPC) to classify data aimed at family and
primary care physicians (WONCA, 1998).

Medical taxonomies or classifications gather es-
sential domain knowledge.Some examples are the
International Classification of Diseases vs. 10
(ICD-10) (WHO, 2004), or the Anatomical Thera-
peutical Chemical (ATC) classification of pharma-
cological substances (WHO, 2019).

2.2 Medical Lexicons

Medical lexicons provide a structured represen-
tation of terms and their linguistic information
(lemmas, inflection, or surface variants); hence,
they are essential for NLP tasks. Unlike medi-
cal thesauri or classifications, they do not register
term hierarchies, classifications nor ontological re-
lations, but they can encode semantic information
and, occasionally, argument structure and corpus-
based frequency data (Thompson et al., 2011).

Initiatives to collect medical lexicons have been
conducted for English (McCray et al., 1994; John-
son, 1999; Davis et al., 2012), German (Weske-
Heck et al., 2002), French (Zweigenbaum et al.,
2005) or Swedish, even in multilingual initia-
tives (Markó et al., 2006). For Spanish, some ef-
forts were sparked when a team at the National
Library of Medicine (Divita et al., 2007) started
to build an equivalent of the MetaMap tool (Aron-
son, 2001). Other teams conducted experiments to
automate the creation of a Spanish MetaMap by
applying machine translation and domain ontolo-
gies (Carrero et al., 2008). These initiatives, to the
best of our knowledge, did not achieve a Spanish
lexicon available for medical NLP.

Besides medical lexicons, domain-specific vo-
cabularies were collected for Biology (Thompson



154

et al., 2011). With a different perspective and goal,
Consumer Health Vocabularies have been col-
lected to bridge the gap between patients’ expres-
sions and healthcare professionals’ jargon (Zeng
and Tse, 2006; Keselman et al., 2007).

2.3 The Unified Medical Language System
The Unified Medical Language System R©

(UMLS) (Bodenreider, 2004) MetaThesaurus
includes thesauri. The version we used (2018AB)
gathers 210 sources and over 3.82 millions of
concepts in 23 languages. Synonym terms are
encoded with Concept Unique Identifiers (CUIs);
and concepts are assigned a semantic type and
group (McCray et al., 2001).

2.4 Methods for Creating Medical Lexicons
We will restrict us here to a shallow overview of
approaches and will not consider taxonomy nor
ontology building. Methods for widening medi-
cal vocabularies range from generating syntactic-
level variants of multi-word terms (Jacquemin,
1999), inferring derivation rules from string sim-
ilarity matches and morphological relations be-
tween derivational variants (Grabar and Zweigen-
baum, 2000), gathering inflected variants semi-
automatically (Cartoni and Zweigenbaum, 2010),
or deriving terms from corpora (more below).

Graeco-Latin components are very productive
for coining medical terms; thus, several BioNLP
systems integrate morphology-based lexical re-
sources. For example, for decomposing terms
morphosemantically and deriving their defini-
tions (Namer and Zweigenbaum, 2004), or map-
ping queries to concepts and indexing documents
in cross-lingual information retrieval, based on a
subword-based morpheme thesaurus (Markó et al.,
2005). In this line, generating paraphrase equiv-
alents of neoclassical compounds (e.g. thyrome-
galia→ enlarged thyroid) is an approach with po-
tential for deriving new terms, and concept nor-
malization systems (Thompson and Ananiadou,
2018) already implement it. Because string simi-
larity measures and edit distance patterns are used
for normalization—e.g (Tsuruoka et al., 2007;
Kate, 2015)—and terminology mapping (Dziadek
et al., 2017), these approaches are also powerful
for expanding medical lexicons from a set of ref-
erence terms. Decomposition of multi-word terms
and synonym expansion of their components are
also alternative strategies applied in normalization
systems (Tseytlin et al., 2016).

Corpus-derived medical terminology construc-
tion requires collecting domain texts and applying
term extraction methods, among others: comput-
ing graphs of relations between parse trees and
word dependency similarities (Nazarenko et al.,
2001), using parallel corpora to map cognates or
aligned words (Sbrissia et al., 2004; Deléger et al.,
2009), linking terms or abbreviations to their def-
initions or expanded word forms in the text where
they occur (Yu and Agichtein, 2003; McCrae and
Collier, 2008), using dictionary features to iden-
tify polysemy (Pezik et al., 2008), combining
text mining techniques with databases (Thomp-
son et al., 2011), or having experts review terms,
a method which has been used to build disease-
specific vocabularies (Wang et al., 2016).

Approaches based on the Firthian Distribu-
tional hypothesis exploit distributional similarity
metrics (Carroll et al., 2012). Among them, more
recent distributional semantics methods represent
terms in the vector space, or calculate word-
embeddings to compute similarity measures be-
tween vectors, thus allowing the unsupervised ex-
pansion of domain terms (Pyysalo et al., 2013;
Skeppstedt et al., 2013; Henriksson et al., 2014;
Wang et al., 2015; Ahltorp et al., 2016; Segura-
Bedmar and Martı́nez, 2017) or concept normal-
ization (Limsopatham and Collier, 2016).

Lastly, to develop Consumer Health Vocabular-
ies (CHV), a variety of techniques have been used:
analysis by experts of Medline queries (Zeng
and Tse, 2006), term recognition methods and
collaborative review of user logs in medical
sites (Zeng et al., 2007), hybrid methods com-
bining n-grams extraction, the C-value, and dic-
tionary look-up (Doing-Harris and Zeng-Treitler,
2011), co-occurrence analysis of terms and seed
words (Jiang and Yang, 2013), or approaches
based of similarity measures between CHV lexi-
cons and reference lexicons (Seedorff et al., 2013).

3 Methods

Figure 2 depicts the methods used to collect the
MedLexSp lexicon. In a first step (left part of Fig-
ure 2), we leveraged the lemmas and word forms
obtained from a Spanish medical lexicon, mostly
corpus-derived; we will refer to it as the base list.
We only used the subset of lemmas and forms that
could be mapped authomatically to UMLS CUIs
(exact string match). In a second step, we added
missing variants of terms using different methods:



155

Figure 2: Methods to collect the MedLexSp lexicon.

• Testing string distance metrics to match
terms in the base list to variants that re-
mained unmatched: e.g. eccema ↔ eczema
(’eczema’, C0013595).

• Incorporating derivational variants to the
base list: e.g. aneurisma (‘aneurysm’) ↔
aneurismático (‘aneurysmatic’, C0002940).

• Including conjugated verbs corresponding
to the noun terms with CUIs selected in the
base list: e.g. tos (‘cough’, C0010200) →
toser, tosiendo... (‘to cough’, ‘coughing’...).

• Matching affixes and roots to those terms in
the base list with CUIs: e.g. corazón (‘heart,
C0018787)→ cardio- (‘cardio-’).

• Adding syntactic variants of the multi-word
terms in the base list: e.g. aneurisma aórtico
abdominal (‘aortic abdominal aneurysm’)↔
aneurisma abdominal aórtico (‘abdominal
aortic aneurysm’, C0162871).

• Adding acronyms and abbreviations of
the terms included in the base list: e.g.
aneurisma abdominal aórtico (‘abdominal
aortic aneurysm’, C0162871)→ AAA.

• Extending the base list by mapping the
CUIs of the terms in the subset to gather
missing variants of synonymous terms:
e.g. eccema (‘eczema’, C0013595) ↔ der-
matitis eccematosa (‘eczematous dermatitis’,
C0013595). We considered several sources

from the UMLS—e.g. Spanish Medical Sub-
ject Headings (MeSH), SNOMED CT or
the WHO ART terminology—and external
sources such as the Anatomical Therapeu-
tical Classification, the National Cancer In-
stitute (NCI) Dictionary of Cancer Terms,2

the Nomenclator de prescripción (AEMPS,
2019), OrphaData (INSERM, 2019), or
the Spanish Drug Effect database (SD-
Edb) (Segura-Bedmar et al., 2015).

• Including subsets of missing terms from
thesauri if attested in domain texts. And
vice versa, extracting corpus-derived terms
from domain texts: synonymous terms from
MedlinePlus,3 and terms from Summaries of
Product Characteristics (Segura-Bedmar and
Martı́nez, 2017).

The next subsections explain each method.

3.1 Leveraging an Inflected Lexicon
We started using a list of medical terms col-
lected in a previous project on Spanish med-
ical terminology;4 we will refer to it as the
base list. We collected this resource by com-
bining different methods (Moreno Sandoval and
Campillos Llanos, 2015) applied on a corpus
of 4204 Spanish medical texts (around 4 mil-
lion tokens) (Moreno-Sandoval and Campillos-
Llanos, 2013). To extract candidate medical

2https://www.cancer.gov/espanol/
publicaciones/diccionario

3https://medlineplus.gov/spanish/
4http://labda.inf.uc3m.es/multimedica/

https://www.cancer.gov/espanol/publicaciones/diccionario
https://www.cancer.gov/espanol/publicaciones/diccionario
https://medlineplus.gov/spanish/
http://labda.inf.uc3m.es/multimedica/


156

terms for the base list, we combined rule-based
techniques (Part-of-Speech tagging and filtering
through medical affixes), corpus-based methods
(comparing word forms from a general corpus and
from the domain corpus), and statistical methods,
namely the Log-Likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993).
We checked in medical sources—e.g. the dictio-
nary published by the Spanish Royal Academy of
Medicine (RANME, 2011)—the terms selected by
means of those three methods, before being in-
cluded in the list. This base list was used to build
an automatic term extractor (Campillos Llanos
et al., 2013), and amounted to 38 354 entries.

Because one of the goals of MedLexSp is
concept normalization by using standard domain
terminologies, we did not include the full base
list. We only used terms that could be assigned
UMLS Concept Unique Identifiers (CUIs) in the
UMLS MetaThesaurus version 2018AB, namely
from those terminologies of special biomedical or
clinical interest (e.g. SNOMED CT, WHO ART or
Medical Subject Headings) with available Span-
ish translations. We mapped 18 263 lemmas to
CUIs, which means 47.61% entries of the original
lexicon. CUIs were assigned according to an ex-
act match criterion. For example, donación (‘do-
nation’) is not matched with donación de tejido
(‘Tissue Donation’, C0080231), because the latter
makes reference to a donation subtype. Note that
the current version of MedLexSp does not include
the full list of terms from MeSH or SNOMED CT,
but only those which were originally mapped from
the base list to UMLS terms with CUIs.

3.2 Enriching the Lexicon

String distance metrics We tested mapping
terms from the subset of entities with CUIs to
terms in the UMLS by applying distance met-
rics (Levenshtein, 1966) of less than 2. This al-
lowed us mapping hyphenated variants to terms
without hyphen (e.g. creatina-cinasa ↔ creatina
cinasa, ‘creatine kinase’, C0010287), compound
terms that are often written as single-words (dietil
éter ↔ dietiléter, ‘diethyl ether’, C0014994), or
matching terms with minimal morphological vari-
ation (eccema ↔ eczema, ‘eczema’, C0013595).
A total of 1463 terms with CUIs were matched to
the original base list.

Derivational variants In line with previous
work (Grabar and Zweigenbaum, 2000), we col-
lected a list of equivalent derivational variants of

terms. Using this list, we assigned a CUI to the
corresponding derivational variant: e.g. the CUI
of páncreas (C0030274) was also ascribed to pan-
creático (‘pancreatic’). The current version gath-
ers a total of 801 derivational variants with CUIs.

Conjugated verbs Most terms in the UMLS
or standard terminologies are noun or adjective
phrases. This limits the named entity recogni-
tion of medical concepts expressed with verbs in
free text; given a context such as el paciente tose
(‘the patient coughs’), the concept of ‘coughing’
would not be identified. To widen the scope of
concept normalization, verb terms were mapped
to CUIs from derived nouns: e.g. tos (‘cough-
ing’, C0010200)→ toser (‘to cough’, C0010200).
We again used a list of correspondences between
verbs and deverbal nouns. We included the conju-
gated forms of verb lemmas in each verb entry of
the lexicon. We used a python script that relies
on the lexicon of a Spanish Part-of-Speech tag-
ger (Moreno Sandoval and Guirao, 2006) to gener-
ate all conjugated forms of verb terms: e.g. toser
(‘to cough’) → tose (‘he/she coughs’), tosiendo
(‘coughing’), etc. The current version includes a
total of 295 single- or multi-word verb items.

Affixes and lexical roots In a first step, we
collected affixes and roots from several sources.
Firstly, we leveraged a list used in a previous ex-
periment (Sandoval et al., 2013). This list amounts
to 1719 forms and considers morphological vari-
ants of affixes (e.g. prefix cardio- may have ac-
cented variant forms in Spanish, such as cardió-).
Secondly, we translated to Spanish several affixes
and roots from the Specialist Lexicon R© (McCray
et al., 1994) and then added variant forms. In a
second step, we assigned UMLS CUIs to affixes
and roots in the list. The current list gathers a total
of 161 entries (82 prefixes and 79 suffixes) with
134 different CUIs and 386 variant forms. Note
that many affixes and roots were not included be-
cause they are too underspecified to be assigned to
a CUI, or are not restricted to the medical domain
(e.g. kilo- expresses a quantitative concept).

Abbreviations and acronyms Firstly, we gath-
ered a list of equivalences between full forms
and abbreviations and acronyms; we used three
sources: 1) the collection of Spanish abbre-
viations and acronyms used in hospitals, col-
lected by medical doctors (Yetano and Alberola,
2003); 2) abbreviations and acronyms used in



157

the 2nd IberEval Challenge 2018 on Biomedi-
cal Abbreviation Recognition and Resolution (In-
txaurrondo et al., 2018); and 3) Spanish abbre-
viations and acronyms from Wikipedia.5 Sec-
ondly, we matched the resulting list of equivalent
terms (acronyms and full forms) to UMLS terms,
adding the corresponding CUIs to those miss-
ing acronyms. For example, the full term virus
de Epstein-Barr (‘Epstein-Barr virus’) has CUI
C0014644, and we also assigned this code to the
corresponding acronym in Spanish (VEB). With
this method, we assigned CUIs to 1225 items.

Syntactic variants of terms To widen the cov-
erage of terms mapped to CUIs, we generated
variants of multiword entities by swapping the
word order of their components. Then, we tried
to match each new variant to entities with CUIs.
For example, aneurisma aórtico abdominal (‘aor-
tic abdominal aneurysm’) has CUI C0162871, and
we assigned the same CUI to the generated variant
aneurisma abdominal aórtico (‘abdominal aortic
aneurysm’). With this method, we gathered a total
of 154 variants of terms with CUIs in the base list.

Mapping UMLS term variants through CUIs
We gathered synonymous variants referring to
each corresponding concept by using the UMLS
CUIs from the terms included in the base list. To
avoid including noisy terms adequate for biomedi-
cal natural language processing, we first cleaned
the terms from the terminologies we used. To
do so, we applied methods for cleaning term
strings (Aronson et al., 2008; Hettne et al., 2010;
Névéol et al., 2012; Hellrich et al., 2015). We
deleted paraphrastic terms that include a descrip-
tion or specification of the entity type in the
term string. These terms commonly come from
Spanish SNOMED CT. For example, we deleted
tos (hallazgo), ‘cough (finding)’ (CUI C0010200)
and kept the term (cough, ‘cough’). Likewise,
we removed most anatomic terms beginning with
estructura de (‘structure of’): e.g. regarding
term estructura del ojo (‘structure of eyeball’,
C0015392), we only kept the synonym ojo (‘eye-
ball’). Lastly, terms in the WHO ART terminol-
ogy needed to be accented and reversed regarding
word order: e.g. disociativa, reaccion→ reacción
disociativa (’dissociative reaction’, C0012746).

We also applied an exact-match mapping of

5https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anexo:
Acrnimos_en_medicina

Spanish terms from the base list to the English
component of the UMLS. This method allowed
us to obtain the CUIs of terms unavailable in
Spanish terminologies, which remain unchanged
in the Spanish language. Namely, Latin scien-
tific names (e.g. Campylobacter fetus, C0006814),
compound terms with Graeco-Latin roots (e.g. ab-
dominalgia, C0000737), English acronyms that
are broadly used in the medical discourse with-
out Spanish translation (e.g. GABA, ‘gamma-
aminobutyric acid’, C0016904), or international
brand drug names (e.g. abilify R©). In these cases,
the same word is used in both English and Spanish.
We manually revised the list of mapped terms to
discard homonymous terms with a different mean-
ing in English (e.g. TIP R© is a brand name of a
medical drug, but it also means ‘point’ or ‘sugges-
tion’ in English).

We extended the list of terms by extracting
the information related to rare diseases from
OrphaData (INSERM, 2019).6 We also added
terms of pharmacological substances and inter-
national non-proprietary names from the Spanish
Drug Effect database (SDEdb) (Segura-Bedmar
et al., 2015) and the Nomenclator de pre-
scripción (AEMPS, 2019), a resource published
and updated regularly by the Spanish Agency of
Drugs and Food Products.7

For all these procedures and sources, we applied
semiautomatic methods to generate the singular
and plural inflected forms of the missing terms that
were mapped through CUIs. We used the Pattern
python library (Smedt and Daelemans, 2012) to
create plural forms of terms, which were revised
manually before being included in MedLexSp.

Corpus-derived terms When we started adding
variant terms from thesauri, the question of where
to stop adding terms came up. In the first version,
we decided not to include all terms available in
MeSH or SNOMED CT terminologies, given that
these thesauri contain terms that are often not nec-
essary in clinical or biomedical NER tasks (e.g.
names of trees, wild animals, professions or ab-
stract concepts). On the other hand, to make the

6http://www.orphadata.org/data/
xml/es_product1.xml We make available
the script used to extract terms from OrphaData:
https://github.com/lcampillos/bionlp2019
The code can be adapted to process OrphaData in other
languages (e.g. English, French, Italian or Portuguese).

7http://listadomedicamentos.aemps.gob.
es/prescripcion.zip.

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anexo:Acrónimos_en_medicina
https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anexo:Acrónimos_en_medicina
http://www.orphadata.org/data/xml/es_product1.xml
http://www.orphadata.org/data/xml/es_product1.xml
https://github.com/lcampillos/bionlp2019
http://listadomedicamentos.aemps.gob.es/prescripcion.zip
http://listadomedicamentos.aemps.gob.es/prescripcion.zip


158

resource comprehensive, we needed to comple-
ment the base list with supplementary terms from
thesauri. Hence, in order to decide which items to
include in a first version, we computed term fre-
quencies using a medical corpus from a previous
project (4 million tokens) (Moreno-Sandoval and
Campillos-Llanos, 2013). We currently include
terms from the Spanish MeSH and SNOMED CT
that were missing in the base list, if they were doc-
umented in that corpus. By limiting the inclusion
of such subset of terms, we aim at providing qual-
ity enriched data (i.e. with revised inflected forms)
in a reasonable time and manner.

In a different vein, and similarly to for-
mer work (Calleja et al., 2017), we extracted
terms from Summaries of Product Characteristics
(SPCs). We used Easy Drug Package Leaflets
(EasyDPL), a corpus of 306 texts annotated with
medical drugs and pathological entities (1400 drug
effects) (Segura-Bedmar and Martı́nez, 2017). We
annotated these texts and compared our output an-
notation with regard to this dataset. We used a
purely dictionary-based named-entity recogniser
with modules for normalization (e.g. lower-
casing), tokenization and lemmatization, imple-
mented in spaCy;8 then, the MedLexSp lexicon
was used for exact string matching. We did not use
pre- or post-processing rules in the current version
(e.g. rules of term composition).

In several iterative rounds, we annotated the
texts, identified the unannotated entities, and
added them to the lexicon. We did not add (al-
though annotated in the corpus) entities without
a CUI, e.g. coordinated entities (e.g. pies y
manos frı́as, ‘cold hands and feet’) or too spe-
cific, post-modified terms (e.g. dolor de cabeza
intenso, ‘intense headache’; only ‘headache’ has
CUI C0018681). By using SPCs, we added 837
term entries to MedLexSp, and we ensure that it
includes common terms referring to adverse drug
reactions and medical drugs.

Lastly, for Consumer Health Vocabulary terms,
we extracted synonyms in MedlinePlus Spanish.
This resource provides terms in patient language
that were missing: e.g. ojo vago (‘lazy eye’) is a
synonym of ambliopı́a (‘amblyopia’, C0002418).
We added 783 term entries from this resource. In
addition, we collected 6110 cancer-related terms
from the Spanish version of the National Cancer
Institute Dictionary.

8https://spacy.io/

3.3 Semantic and linguistic information

We added to each CUI and lexical entry the cor-
responding semantic type(s) and group from the
UMLS. To avoid noise when annotating biomed-
ical texts semantically, we disfavoured semantic
types of the semantic group Concepts and Ideas
(CONC, e.g. Quantitative Concept, Functional
Concept or Qualitative Concept), which are rather
unspecified. We only included terms from that
group if no other semantic label was available.
If a concept or term can be assigned to two dif-
ferent groups, the element labelled with CONC
is not included in our lexicon. For example,
the term inhalación (‘inhalation’) can be related
to concept C0004048 (semantic type Organism
Function, and group PHYS) and also to con-
cept C4521689 (semantic type Intellectual Prod-
uct, and group CONC). In this case, we only pre-
serve the lexical entry of concept C0004048 and
we rule out the entry of concept C4521689.

We have also started adding the Part-of-Speech
(PoS) category of each entry in the lexicon. For
multiword terms, the category of the head term is
selected; e.g. enfermedad de Crohn (‘Crohn’s dis-
ease’) is categorized as N (‘noun’). We are cur-
rently testing different techniques to predict the
PoS and automate the assignment of categories to
each entry, which is still not fully satisfactory.

4 Statistics

Table 1 shows the count of entries in the lexicon
according to each source or procedure applied to
map terms to UMLS CUIs. Note that the full
count exceeds the count of term entries in the cur-
rent version of MedLexSp, given that some terms
were gathered through different methods simulta-
neously. Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics
of the lexicon: counts of lemmas and word forms,
and total number of CUIs. Lastly, Table 3 shows
a preliminary count of PoS categories in the cur-
rent version of the lexicon. Note that most entries
are nouns or need revision (UNKN stands for ‘un-
known’); this task is currently being undertaken.

Finally, Figure 3 depicts the distribution of se-
mantic groups. Of note, some groups are under-
represented, due to the corpora and thesauri used
to collect terms. For example, few entities belong
to the GENE group, which implies that the cov-
erage of the current version of MedLexSp is not
adequate for tasks in the Genomics domain.

The amount of lemmas/word forms is lower

https://spacy.io/


159

Method # entries
Abbreviations / acronyms 1225
Affixes / roots 161
Derived adjectives 801
Conjugated verb forms 295
Base list mapped to UMLS CUIs:

Exact match to Spanish UMLS 18 263
Exact match to English UMLS 2534
String distance method 1463
Syntactic variants 134

Terms from thesauri and corpora:
ATC + Nomenclátor + SDEdb 2931
ICD-10 1299
ICPC 55
MedDRA 5015
MedlinePlus 783
MeSH 6831
NCI 6110
OrphaData 10 741
SNOMED CT 23 096
SPCs (EasyDLP corpus) 837

Table 1: Count of lexical entries according to each
source or procedure to map terms to UMLS CUIs.

Lemmas Forms CUIs
Single-words 23 572 23 592 -
Multi-words 52 882 179 451 -
Total 76 454 203 043 30 647

Table 2: Descriptive statistics of the lexicon

PoS Example Count
N pancreas 58 830
UNKN - 13 618
ADJ abdominal 2283
ADJ/N gemelo (‘twin’) 700
NPR Filoviridae 549
V toser (‘to cough’) 295
AFF cardio- 161
ADV gravemente (‘severely’) 20

Table 3: Preliminary counts of Part-of-Speech (PoS)
categories. N: ‘noun’; UNKN: ‘unknown’; ADJ: ‘adjec-
tive’; ADJ/N: a term that can be an adjective or a noun
(depending on the context); NPR: ‘proper name’; AFF:
‘affix’; ADV: ‘adverb’

than in other UMLS-based resources because: 1)
we did not include the full thesauri, but only terms
from the original base list that were mapped to

Figure 3: Distribution of semantic groups in the lexicon

UMLS CUIs; and 2) we cleaned noisy terms.
As explained, descriptors and qualifiers were re-
moved: e.g. SNOMED CT term fiebre (hal-
lazgo) (‘fever (finding)’, C0015967) was short-
ened to fiebre. We also ruled out some con-
cepts belonging to semantic groups that we can
be noisy for clinical or medical NER tasks, such
as CONC or GEOG; e.g. hierro is related to
concept C0302583, ‘iron’, CHEM; or to concept
C0454671, ‘Island of Hierro’, GEOG (the latter
concept was discarded).

5 Development Evaluation

We analysed the coverage of the lexicon with re-
gard to UMLS semantic groups. We applied the
dictionary-based NER tool explained below to a
gold standard available in the community. We fo-
cused on analysing the annotation of few UMLS
groups (DISO, CHEM, PROC and ANAT) and
assessed how well the lexicon annotated them
with regard to the gold standard. We quanti-
fied the matched annotations in terms of preci-
sion, recall and F1-measure by using the BRAT-
Eval script (Verspoor et al., 2013).

A first version of MedLexSp was evaluated with
the Spanish texts from the MANTRA corpus (Kors
et al., 2015), which gathers 100 texts from the Eu-
ropean Medicines Agency (1961 tokens) and 100
texts from Medline (1087 tokens). These texts are
available in BRAT format and were annotated with
UMLS CUIs, semantic types and groups. We pre-
processed the annotated texts for mapping refer-
ence annotations to UMLS semantic groups.

With this dataset, we achieved an overall F-
measure of 0.83 (exact match) and of 0.87 (ap-
proximate match), although the performance var-



160

Exact match Approx. match
P R F1 P R F1

ANAT 0.64 0.91 0.75 0.67 0.98 0.80
CHEM 0.85 0.96 0.90 0.88 0.97 0.92
DISO 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.89 0.92 0.90
PROC 0.73 0.84 0.78 0.76 0.88 0.82
OA 0.79 0.87 0.83 0.83 0.93 0.87

Table 4: Evaluation of the lexicon; P: precision;
R: recall; F1: F-measure; OA: overall

ied across semantic groups (Table 4). In our er-
ror analysis, we observed that unmatched entities
were misspellings (e.g. ∗deteción instead of de-
tección, ‘detection’), discontinuous entities (e.g.
hinchazón de la piel in hinchazón y hormigueo de
la piel, ‘swelling and tingling of skin’), or entities
whose scope was wrongly annotated.

6 Discussion and Conclusions

The lexicon is being developed by means of hybrid
NLP methods and corpus-derived terms. We com-
bine the mapping of corpus terms to available the-
sauri, and viceversa, terms missing in the lexicon
were attested in domain texts, so that only a sub-
set of attested terms be included in a first version.
Interestingly, searching terms from thesauri in a
corpus showed us that many of those terms show
low frequencies. From a subset of 56 813 MeSH
terms missing in the base list, only 6 676 (11.75%)
occurred in the corpus we used (Moreno-Sandoval
and Campillos-Llanos, 2013). Although this is
due to the influence of the text types, it also reflects
the difference betweem terms from thesauri and in
real usage. This is another argument that stands
for the need for dedicated lexicons combined with
NLP methods to achieve successful NER results.

A limitation of our evaluation procedure is the
restriction to a very small set of texts; hence, re-
sults are not comparable to other tasks or text
types. To provide more generalizable results, we
need to evaluate the MedLexSp lexicon with an-
other annotated medical corpus in Spanish, but
such resource is not freely available to date.

We assume the lexicon is not task-independent.
To avoid ambiguity, terms would need to be fil-
tered according to the semantic types needed. For
example, terms from the Occupation or Discipline
group could be removed for most NER tasks. We
are also aware of the limits of a purely lexicon-
based approach. Contexts of variation occur in

multiwords with coordinated terms (e.g. cáncer de
mama y ovario, ‘breast and ovarian cancer’) and
adjective modifiers. For example, MedLexSp in-
cludes the term cáncer de mama (‘breast cancer’),
but not common variants such as cáncer de mama
derecha (‘right breast cancer’) or cáncer de una
mama (‘cancer of one breast’). Both phenomena
need specific processing techniques.

Mapping concepts to terms differing across va-
rieties of the Spanish language was not exhaus-
tive. As we departed mainly from a set of corpus-
derived terms, most terms belong to the variety
used in the texts (i.e. Peninsular Spanish). How-
ever, since we used other terminological sources,
terms from other varieties were included: e.g.
virus sincitial respiratorio (‘respiratory syncytial
virus’, C0035236) is a term preferred in Spain or
Colombia, but we have the variant virus sincicial
respiratorio (most frequent in Chile or Argentina).
These aspects need nonetheless improvement in
future versions, in the same way as the coverage
of terms from Consumer Health Vocabularies.

Lastly, we are interested in exploring
embedding-based methods for term expan-
sion, and in evaluating the lexicon with a broader
set of domain texts.

Acknowledgments

This work has been done under the NLPMedTerm
project,9 funded by the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research programme under the Marie
Skodowska-Curie grant agreement no. 713366
(InterTalentum UAM). We greatly thank the
institutions who gave permission to include their
data in MedLexSp, and also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable comments.

References
AEMPS. 2019. Nomenclátor de prescripción. www.
aemps.gob.es [accessed 2019-03-09].

Magnus Ahltorp, Maria Skeppstedt, Shiho Kitajima,
Aron Henriksson, Rafal Rzepka, and Kenji Araki.
2016. Expansion of medical vocabularies using
distributional semantics on Japanese patient blogs.
Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 7(1):58.

Alan R Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomed-
ical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap

9http://www.lllf.uam.es/ESP/
nlpmedterm_en.html

www.aemps.gob.es
www.aemps.gob.es
http://www.lllf.uam.es/ESP/nlpmedterm_en.html
http://www.lllf.uam.es/ESP/nlpmedterm_en.html


161

program. In Proc. of the AMIA Symposium, pages
17–21. American Medical Informatics Association.

Alan R Aronson, James G Mork, Aurélie Névéol,
Sonya E Shooshan, and Dina Demner-Fushman.
2008. Methodology for creating UMLS content
views appropriate for biomedical natural language
processing. In Proc. of the AMIA Annual Sympo-
sium, pages 21–25. American Medical Informatics
Association.

Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedi-
cal terminology. Nucleic acids research, 32(suppl
1):D267–D270.

Elliot G Brown, Louise Wood, and Sue Wood. 1999.
The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
(MedDRA). Drug safety, 20(2):109–117.

Pablo Calleja, Raúl Garcı́a-Castro, Guadalupe Aguado-
de Cea, and Asunción Gómez-Pérez. 2017. Ex-
panding SNOMED-CT through Spanish Drug Sum-
maries of Product Characteristics. In Proc. of
the Knowledge Capture Conference, pages 29–37.
ACM.

L Campillos Llanos, A Moreno Sandoval, and
JM Guirao. 2013. An automatic term extractor for
biomedical terms in Spanish. In Proc. of the 5th Int.
Symposium on Languages in Biology and Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Francisco Carrero, José Carlos Cortizo, and José Marı́a
Gómez. 2008. Building a Spanish MMTx by using
automatic translation and biomedical ontologies. In
International Conference on Intelligent Data Engi-
neering and Automated Learning, pages 346–353.
Springer.

John Carroll, Rob Koeling, and Shivani Puri. 2012.
Lexical acquisition for clinical text mining using dis-
tributional similarity. In International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics, pages 232–246. Springer.

Bruno Cartoni and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2010. Semi-
Automated Extension of a Specialized Medical Lex-
icon for French. In Proc. of LREC, Valletta, Malta.

Billy Chiu, Olga Majewska, Sampo Pyysalo, Laura
Wey, Ulla Stenius, Anna Korhonen, and Martha
Palmer. 2019. A neural classification method for
supporting the creation of BioVerbNet. Journal of
Biomedical Semantics, 10(1):2:1–2:12.

James J Cimino. 1996. Coding systems in health care.
Methods of information in medicine, 35(04/05):273–
284.

Allan Peter Davis, Thomas C Wiegers, Michael C
Rosenstein, and Carolyn J Mattingly. 2012.
MEDIC: a practical disease vocabulary used at the
Comparative Toxicogenomics Database. Database,
2012.

Louise Deléger, Magnus Merkel, and Pierre Zweigen-
baum. 2009. Translating medical terminologies
through word alignment in parallel text corpora.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42(4):692–701.

Guy Divita, Graciela Rosemblat, and Allen C Browne.
2007. Building a Medical Spanish Lexicon. In
Proc. of the AMIA Symposium, page 941.

Kristina M Doing-Harris and Qing Zeng-Treitler. 2011.
Computer-assisted update of a consumer health vo-
cabulary through mining of social network data.
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 13(2):e37.

Kevin Donnelly. 2006. SNOMED-CT: The advanced
terminology and coding system for eHealth. Studies
in health technology and informatics, 121:279–290.

Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics
of surprise and coincidence. Computational linguis-
tics, 19(1):61–74.

Juliusz Dziadek, Aron Henriksson, and Martin Duneld.
2017. Improving terminology mapping in clinical
text with context-sensitive spelling correction. In-
formatics for Health: Connected Citizen-Led Well-
ness and Population Health, 235:241.

Natalia Grabar and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2000. A gen-
eral method for sifting linguistic knowledge from
structured terminologies. In Proc. of the AMIA Sym-
posium, pages 310–314. American Medical Infor-
matics Association.

Johannes Hellrich, Stefan Schulz, Sven Buechel, and
Udo Hahn. 2015. Jufit: A configurable rule engine
for filtering and generating new multilingual UMLS
terms. In Proc. of the AMIA Symposium, pages 604–
610. American Medical Informatics Association.

Aron Henriksson, Hans Moen, Maria Skeppstedt, Vi-
das Daudaravičius, and Martin Duneld. 2014. Syn-
onym extraction and abbreviation expansion with
ensembles of semantic spaces. Journal of Biomedi-
cal Semantics, 5(1):6–.

Kristina M Hettne, Erik M van Mulligen, Martijn J
Schuemie, Bob JA Schijvenaars, and Jan A Kors.
2010. Rewriting and suppressing UMLS terms for
improved biomedical term identification. Journal of
Biomedical Semantics, 1(1):5.

INSERM. 2019. Orphadata: Free access data
from Orphanet. Data version (XML data ver-
sion). http://www.orphadata.org [ac-
cessed 2019-05-10].

Ander Intxaurrondo, Montserrat Marimón, Aitor
González-Agirre, José Antonio López-Martı́n,
H Rodrı́guez Betanco, J Santamarı́a, Marta Villegas,
and Martin Krallinger. 2018. Finding mentions
of abbreviations and their definitions in Spanish
Clinical Cases: the BARR2 shared task evalua-
tion results. In Proc. of IberEval@SEPLN 2018.
SEPLN.

http://www.orphadata.org


162

Christian Jacquemin. 1999. Syntagmatic and paradig-
matic representations of term variation. In Proc. of
the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 341–348.

Ling Jiang and Christopher C Yang. 2013. Using co-
occurrence analysis to expand consumer health vo-
cabularies from social media data. In 2013 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Healthcare Informatics,
pages 74–81. IEEE.

Stephen B Johnson. 1999. A semantic lexicon for med-
ical language processing. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 6(3):205–218.

Rohit J Kate. 2015. Normalizing clinical terms using
learned edit distance patterns. Journal of the Amer-
ican Medical Informatics Association, 23(2):380–
386.

Alla Keselman, Tony Tse, Jon Crowell, Allen Browne,
Long Ngo, and Qing Zeng. 2007. Assessing con-
sumer health vocabulary familiarity: an exploratory
study. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
9(1):e5.

Jan A Kors, Simon Clematide, Saber A Akhondi,
Erik M van Mulligen, and Dietrich Rebholz-
Schuhmann. 2015. A multilingual gold-standard
corpus for biomedical concept recognition: the
Mantra GSC. Journal of the American Medical In-
formatics Association, 22(5):948–956.

Vladimir Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of
correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. In So-
viet Physics Doklady, volume 10, pages 707–710.

Nut Limsopatham and Nigel Collier. 2016. Normalis-
ing medical concepts in social media texts by learn-
ing semantic representation. In Proc. of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1,
pages 1014–1023.

Kornél Markó, Robert Baud, Pierre Zweigenbaum,
Lars Borin, Magnus Merkel, and Stefan Schulz.
2006. Towards a multilingual medical lexicon. In
Proc. of the AMIA Annual Symposium, pages 534–
538. American Medical Informatics Association.

Kornél Markó, Stefan Schulz, and Udo Hahn.
2005. MorphoSaurus. Design and evaluation of
an interlingua-based, cross-language document re-
trieval engine for the medical domain. Methods of
information in medicine, 44(04):537–545.

John McCrae and Nigel Collier. 2008. Synonym set
extraction from the biomedical literature by lexical
pattern discovery. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1):159.

Alexa T McCray, Anita Burgun, and Olivier Bodenrei-
der. 2001. Aggregating UMLS semantic types for
reducing conceptual complexity. Studies in health
technology and informatics, 84(0 1):216–220.

Alexa T McCray, Suresh Srinivasan, and Allen C
Browne. 1994. Lexical methods for managing varia-
tion in biomedical terminologies. In Proc. of the An-
nual Symposium on Computer Application in Medi-
cal Care, pages 235–239. American Medical Infor-
matics Association.

Antonio Moreno-Sandoval and Leonardo Campillos-
Llanos. 2013. Design and Annotation of
MultiMedica–A Multilingual Text Corpus of the
Biomedical Domain. Procedia-Social and Behav-
ioral Sciences, 95:33–39.

Antonio Moreno Sandoval and Leonardo Campil-
los Llanos. 2015. Combinación de estrategias
léxicas y estadı́sticas para el reconocimiento au-
tomático de términos: aplicación a un corpus de
medicina. Lingüı́stica Española Actual, 37:173–
197.

Antonio Moreno Sandoval and José Marı́a Guirao.
2006. Morphosyntactic tagging of the Spanish C-
ORAL-ROM corpus: Methodology, tools and eval-
uation. Spoken language corpus and linguistic in-
formatics, 5:199–218.

Fiammetta Namer and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2004. Ac-
quiring meaning for French medical terminology:
contribution of morphosemantics. In Proc. of Med-
Info, pages 535–539.

Adeline Nazarenko, Pierre Zweigenbaum, Benoı̂t
Habert, and Jacques Bouaud. 2001. Corpus-based
extension of a terminological semantic lexicon. Re-
cent Advances in Computational Terminology, pages
327–351.

Aurélie Névéol, Jiao Li, and Zhiyong Lu. 2012.
Linking multiple disease-related resources through
UMLS. In Proc. of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT inter-
national health informatics symposium, pages 767–
772. ACM.

Maite Oronoz, Arantza Casillas, Koldo Gojenola, and
Alicia Perez. 2013. Automatic annotation of med-
ical records in Spanish with disease, drug and sub-
stance names. In Iberoamerican Congress on Pat-
tern Recognition, pages 536–543. Springer.

Piotr Pezik, A Jimeno-Yepes, V Lee, and D Rebholz-
Schuhmann. 2008. Static dictionary features for
term polysemy identification. In Proc. of Building
and Evaluating Resources for Biomedical Text Min-
ing LREC Workshop, Marrakech, Morocco.

Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Hans Moen, Salakoski
Tapio, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2013. Distributional
semantics resources for biomedical text processing.
Proc. of Languages in Biology and Medicine, pages
39–44.

RANME. 2011. Diccionario de Términos Médicos.
Editorial Panamericana.



163

A Moreno Sandoval, L Campillos Llanos, A Gon-
zlez Martnez, and JM Guirao. 2013. An affix-based
method for automatic term recognition from a med-
ical corpus of Spanish. In Proc. of the 7th Corpus
Linguistics Conference 2013, Lancaster University.

Eduardo Sbrissia, Percy Nohama, Stefan Schulz, and
Kornél Markó. 2004. Semi-Supervised Acquisition
of a Spanish Lexicon from a Portuguese Seed Lexi-
con. Proc. of COLING.

Michael Seedorff, Kevin J Peterson, Laurie A Nelsen,
Cristian Cocos, Jennifer B McCormick, Christo-
pher G Chute, and Jyotishman Pathak. 2013. Incor-
porating expert terminology and disease risk factors
into consumer health vocabularies. In Biocomputing
2013, pages 421–432. World Scientific.

Isabel Segura-Bedmar and Paloma Martı́nez. 2017.
Simplifying drug package leaflets written in Span-
ish by using word embedding. Journal of Biomedi-
cal Semantics, 8(1):45.

Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Paloma Martı́nez, Ricardo Re-
vert, and Julián Moreno-Schneider. 2015. Explor-
ing Spanish health social media for detecting drug
effects. In BMC medical informatics and decision
making, volume 15, page S6. BioMed Central.

Maria Skeppstedt, Magnus Ahltorp, and Aron Henriks-
son. 2013. Vocabulary expansion by semantic ex-
traction of medical terms. Proc. of Languages in
Biology and Medicine, pages 63–67.

Tom De Smedt and Walter Daelemans. 2012. Pattern
for python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
13(Jun):2063–2067.

Paul Thompson and Sophia Ananiadou. 2018. Hyphen.
Terminology., 24(1):91–121.

Paul Thompson, John McNaught, Simonetta Monte-
magni, Nicoletta Calzolari, Riccardo Del Gratta, Vi-
vian Lee, Simone Marchi, Monica Monachini, Piotr
Pezik, Valeria Quochi, et al. 2011. The BioLexicon:
a large-scale terminological resource for biomedical
text mining. BMC Bioinformatics, 12(1):397.

Eugene Tseytlin, Kevin Mitchell, Elizabeth Legowski,
Julia Corrigan, Girish Chavan, and Rebecca S Ja-
cobson. 2016. Noble–flexible concept recognition
for large-scale biomedical natural language process-
ing. BMC Bioinformatics, 17(1):32.

Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, John McNaught, Junichi Tsujii,
and Sophia Ananiadou. 2007. Learning string sim-
ilarity measures for gene/protein name dictionary
look-up using logistic regression. Bioinformatics,
23(20):2768–2774.

Karin Verspoor, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Lawrence
Cavedon, Tara McIntosh, Asha Herten-Crabb, Zoë
Thomas, and John-Paul Plazzer. 2013. Annotat-
ing the biomedical literature for the human variome.
Database, 2013.

Chang Wang, Liangliang Cao, and Bowen Zhou. 2015.
Medical synonym extraction with concept space
models. In Proc. of the Twenty-Fourth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
989–995.

Liqin Wang, Bruce E Bray, Jianlin Shi, Guilherme
Del Fiol, and Peter J Haug. 2016. A method for the
development of disease-specific reference standards
vocabularies from textual biomedical literature re-
sources. Artificial intelligence in medicine, 68:47–
57.

Gesa Weske-Heck, Albrecht Zaiss, Matthias Zabel,
Stefan Schulz, Wolfgang Giere, Michael Schopen,
and Rüdiger Klar. 2002. The German specialist lex-
icon. In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, pages
884–888. American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion.

WHO. 2004. International Statistical Classification
of Diseases and Related Health Problems. World
Health Organization.

WHO. 2019. Anatomical Therapeutical Chemi-
cal classification. Uppsala: Nordic Council on
Medicines.

WONCA. 1998. International Classification of Pri-
mary Care 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1998.

Javier Yetano and Vincent Alberola. 2003. Diccionario
de siglas médicas y otras abreviaturas, epónimos y
términos médicos relacionados con la codificación
de las altas hospitalarias. SEDOM.

Hong Yu and Eugene Agichtein. 2003. Extracting syn-
onymous gene and protein terms from biological lit-
erature. Bioinformatics, 19(suppl 1):i340–i349.

Qing Zeng and Tony Tse. 2006. Exploring and de-
veloping consumer health vocabularies. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association,
13(1):24–29.

Qing Zeng, Tony Tse, Guy Divita, Alla Keselman,
Jonathan Crowell, Allen Browne, Sergey Gory-
achev, and Long Ngo. 2007. Term identifica-
tion methods for consumer health vocabulary de-
velopment. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
9(1):e4.

Pierre Zweigenbaum, Robert Baud, Anita Burgun, Fi-
ammetta Namer, Éric Jarrousse, Natalia Grabar,
Patrick Ruch, Franck Le Duff, Jean-Franois Forget,
Magaly Douyère, and Stéfan Darmoni. 2005. A uni-
fied medical lexicon for French. International Jour-
nal of Medical Informatics, 74(2–4):119–124.

A Appendix - Copyright and Usage

MedLexSp is distributed freely for research pur-
poses; contact for a license at the email address
provided or through the project page. Some



164

thesauri included in MedLexSp were obtained
through a distribution and usage agreement from
the corresponding institutions who develop them.
In addition, some material in the UMLS Metathe-
saurus is from copyrighted sources of the re-
spective copyright holders. Users of the UMLS
Metathesaurus are solely responsible for compli-
ance with any copyright, patent or trademark re-
strictions and are referred to the copyright, patent
or trademark notices appearing in the original
sources, all of which are hereby incorporated by
reference.

The version of MedLexSp freely available for
research does not include terms nor coding data
from terminological sources with copyright rights;
only the subset of data in MedLexSp without us-
age restrictions is accessible.

We acknowledge the intellectual property rights
of the institutions who develop the sources from
which we extracted subsets of terms to compile the
lexicon, and who gave permission (or provide a li-
cence to reuse their data) to distribute these sub-
sets of terms: the National Library of Medicine
maintains the MedLinePlus resource and the Med-
ical Subject Headings, and BIREME/OPS (Latin-
American and Caribbean Center on Health Sci-
ences Information) is in charge of the Spanish
translation (Descriptores en Ciencias de la Salud,
DeCS); the National Cancer Institute publishes
the Dictionary of Cancer Terms; the French Na-
tional Institute of Health and Medical Research
(INSERM) supports OrphaNet and gathers the
information provided in OrphaData; the World
Health Organization produces the Adverse Drug
Reactions terminology, the International Classifi-
cation of Diseases vs. 10, and the Anatomical
Therapeutical Classification; the Spanish transla-
tion of the International Classification of Primary
Care (ICPC) is supported by the World Organiza-
tion of Family Doctors; and the Spanish Agency
of Drugs and Food Products (AEMPS) publishes
the Nomenclátor de prescripción. MedLexSp
also gathers some terms from the Spanish ver-
sion of the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory
Activities (MedDRA), which is maintained by
the Maintenance and Support Services Organiza-
tion (MSSO). However, the distributed version of
MedLexSp does not include terms coming solely
from the MedDRA sources, because of copyright
restrictions. In addition, MedLexSp includes a
subset of the Spanish version of SNOMED Clini-

cal Terms R©, which is used by permission of the
International Health Terminology Standards De-
velopment Organization (IHTSDO; all rights re-
served). SNOMED CT R© was originally created
by The College of American Pathologists.


