




































Exploring Cognitive Effort in Written Translation of Chinese 
Neologisms: An Eye-tracking and Keylogging Study 

 
Jinjin Chen 

Center for Studies of 
Translation, Interpreting 

and Cognition, University 
of Macau, Taipa, Macau 

SAR, China 
chenjj0601@163.com 

Defeng Li 
Center for Studies of 

Translation, Interpreting 
and Cognition, University 
of Macau, Taipa, Macau 

SAR, China 
defengli@um.edu.mo 

Victoria Lei 
Center for Studies of 

Translation, Interpreting 
and Cognition, University 
of Macau, Taipa, Macau 

SAR, China 
viclcl@um.edu.mo 

Abstract  

Neologisms are newly coined lexical units or 
existing lexical units that acquire a new sense, and 
they pose great challenges to translators in 
conducting translation task (Newmark, 1988). 
This study, taking cognitive effort as a window, is 
an attempt to find out how the human mind invests 
its energy in information processing as well as 
language production during written translation of 
Chinese neologisms. 

Three research questions are formulated in this 
study: (1) Are translators more cognitively 
effortful when doing written translation of 
Chinese neologisms? (2) Does knowledge of 
context have an effect on the cognitive effort of 
translators in translating Chinese neologisms? (3) 
How translators differ in investing cognitive effort 
in translating Chinese neologisms from different 
text types? 

Three groups of people are invited to the 
experiment including professional translators, 
well-trained graduate translation students, and 
untrained translation students/bilinguals. They are 
asked to perform three from-scratch written 
translation tasks from Chinese to English, after 
which a retrospective interview is conducted to 
check their knowledge of context and translation 
strategy in relation to their tasks. A different text 
type is used for each of these three tasks, while 
each text consists of 200 words and 7 Chinese 
neologisms. Participants’ translation outputs are 
recorded by Translog-II and Tobbi 300. Various 

                                                 
© 2019 Jinjin Chen, Defeng Li and Victoria Lei. This article 
is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 licence, no 
derivative works, attribution, CCBY-ND. 

indicators of cognitive effort including source text 
gaze measures, target text gaze measures, and 
target text keystroke measures are analyzed in 
connection to the subjects’ self-assessment using 
NASA TLX as well as holistic quality assessment 
by translator trainers. 

It is expected that this study will shed light on 
whether more cognitive effort is allocated in 
written translation of Chinese neologisms, as well 
as elucidate the relationship between cognitive 
effort and knowledge of context. In addition, the 
study intends to find clues of the relationship 
among cognitive effort, text type, translation 
strategy, and translation quality. 

References 
Newmark, Peter. 1988. A Textbook of Translation. New 

York: Prentice Hall. 

 
 
 

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 23


