












































 

 

Abstract 

This paper follows a recent court case which 

judged that “Don't despair” (ال تيأس) by Aaidh ibn 

Abdullah Al-Qarni was plagiarized from Salwa 

Aladian’s “That is how they defeat Despair” ( هكذا

 We use techniques of computational .(هزموا اليأس

stylometry, Hierarchical Agglomerative 

Clustering Analysis and Principal Components 

Analysis, to show that the disputed sections not 

only resemble Salwa’s work in content, but also 

in writing style.   

1 Introduction 

Aaidh ibn Abdullah al-Qarni was born in 1960 in 

Saudi Arabia. He graduated from Imam 

Muhammad Ibn Saud University and became one 

of the most respected scholars in his country. Later 

he published more than 80 books in a very short 

time and became a very famous writer. In 2003 he 

introduced his book “Don’t be sad” (ال تحزن) and it 

was one of the most successful books not only in 

Saudi Arabia but also in the world. The book 

addressed both Muslims and non-Muslims and was 

translated into many different languages. More 

than 10 million copies of his book were sold, and 

his followers increased. In 2012 Al-Qarni was 

found guilty of plagiarism, as Salwa Aladian 

claimed that he took many “Success stories” from 

her book “That is how they defeat Despair” ( هكذا

 and used them in his book “Don't (هزموا اليأس

despair” (ال تيأس). without putting any referencing 

to her work. Salwa stated that she collected these 

stories and used them in her book using her writing 

style. She said that Al-Qarni took the stories ready 

from her book and had stolen her book’s 

introduction as well.  

Al-Qarni’s followers started to attack Salwa on 

social media and a fight of words took place 

between Salwa’s family and Al-Qarni’s supporters. 

Abdallah (2019) said that “The cleric had used his 

religious standing and media exposure to rally a 

group of dedicated students and followers against 

Salwa. These followers promptly used online 

forums and social media websites to attack the 

young author.” The case took about one year, and 

Al-Qarni continued to deny the fact that he took the 

stories from Salwa’s book. Salwa said that she 

trusted the justice in Saudi Arabia, and she 

introduced her case to the court. After reviewing 

the books, the court found that Al-Qarni was guilty 

and fined him. Al-Qarni paid 300,000 Saudi Riyals 

to Salwa and apologized to her after he stated that 

this was not his fault. Al-Qarni said that he had 

asked one of his students to collect stories about 

successful people and the student collected all of 

them from Salwa’s book. In 2018, Al-Qarni was 

found guilty in another academic dishonesty case. 

The London-based Arabic language newspaper 

Arabi21 said that the heirs of the Syrian writer 

Abdel Rahman Raafat Pasha had won a case 

against Al-Qarni for allegedly stealing their father's 

book "Pictures of the Lives of the Companions."  

(See: https://m.arabi21.com/Story/1072807). Al-

Qarni was convicted of reading specific paragraphs 

from the book on a television program without 

giving any reference to the original author. Al-

Qarni had to pay a fine of 30,000 Saudi Riyals for 

infringing intellectual property rights and 120,000 

Writing Styles of Salwa and Al-Qarni 

 

Ahmed Ibrahim Ahmed Omer and Michael P. Oakes 

Research Institute of Language and Information Processing 

University of Wolverhampton 

Wolverhampton, England 

a.omer@wlv.ac.uk 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

https://m.arabi21.com/Story/1072807


 

 

Saudi Riyals to Abdel Rahman Raafat’s family, in 

addition to the obligation to stop broadcasting or 

rebroadcasting the program. "After five years of 

litigation, we got a verdict against one of the 

preachers on behalf of a group of heirs. The 

preacher raided a book by their father, may Allah 

have mercy on him, and the judge sentenced him 

to a fine of 30 thousand, and ordered compensation 

of our client with 120 thousand, and we will ask for 

more than this" said lawyer Abdul Rahman Al-

Lahim, who was appointed by the heirs of Pasha. 

2 Related Work 

Ouamour and Sayoud (2012) tested different 

character and word features using an SMO-SVM 

classifier on text samples extracted from textbooks. 

These features included character bigram and rare 

words. The texts were collected from ten different 

authors who wrote their texts in the domain of 

travel. Sayoud (2012) also studied the difference in 

writing style between the Quran (The Muslim holy 

book) and the Hadith (sayings of the Prophet 

Muhammad). In his experiments, he extracted four 

segments from each book and used a hierarchical 

clustering algorithm to cluster the text according to 

style. For each book, four segments were extracted. 

In the first experiment, Sayoud investigated the use 

of discriminative words such as ‘those’ ( الذين) and 

the word ‘earth’ ( األرض   ). He noticed that these 

words appeared more often in one of the books 

than in the other, so he decided to use them as a 

feature set.  In the second experiment, he used 

word length to discriminate between the two styles. 

Finally, in the third experiment, he used a new 

parameter called COST. The COST parameter is a 

cumulative distance measuring the similarity 

between the ending of one sentence and the ending 

of the next.  This gives an estimation measure of 

the poetic form of the text. When Arabic poets 

write a series of poems, they make a termination 

similarity between the neighboring sentences of 

the poem, such as the final syllable or letter. This 

known in Arabic as rhythm or “Qafeia”.  

Hadjadj and Sayoud (2016) also investigated the 

authorship of the Quran and the Hadith, 

implementing two experiments to explore whether 

their writing styles are similar of different. The first 

experiments used Manhattan centroid distance and 

the SMO-SVM classifier, while the second 

experiment used hierarchical agglomerative 

clustering. Three main features were extracted 

from the dataset: interrogative words, the 

discriminative words, and COST. The purpose of 

Sayoud’s experiments on the Quran and Hadiths 

was to challenge the assumption that the Quran 

was invented by the Prophet Mohammed (and 

therefore not handed to him by God). He tried to 

show that the books have two distinctive styles and 

therefore could not have been written by the same 

author (Sayoud, 2017). 

Alwajeeh, Al-Ayyoub, and Hmeidi (2014) 

manually collected texts from Arabic news 

websites. The texts consisted of 500 different 

articles written by five different authors. They then 

ran their data through two well-known classifiers, 

i.e. Naïve Bayes and SVM. In their experiment, 

they achieved near-perfect accuracy for both 

classifiers. AbdulRazzaq and Mustafa (2014) claim 

to be the first to the use classic Delta distance 

(Burrows, 2002), a measure of difference between 

two texts, to find the authorship of Arabic texts. In 

their study, they demonstrated the suitability of this 

method for Arabic texts by using a database 

containing 30 books written by five different 

authors. The results showed that word bigrams and 

word trigrams were the most suitable features for 

Arabic authorship studies. Rabab’ah et al., (2016) 

used two common approaches, i.e. BOW and 

Stylometry Features (SF), to find authorship in 

Arabic tweets. The authors collected tweets from 

twelve famous Arabic Twitter users, professionals 

working in different fields, e.g. religion, politics, 

sport, academia, and music, each with many 

followers. Some of the features were extracted by 

the morphological analysis tool MADAMIRA 

(Pasha et al., 2014). This tool returns useful 

information about the words like aspect, gender, 

mood, and part of speech. Other features like the 

unigram and BOW were extracted using the Weka 

tool (Hall et al., 2009). The following classifiers 

were tested to find which set of features produced 

the highest accuracy: Naïve Bayes, Decision trees, 

and SVM. The results show that combining all the 

feature sets they computed yields the best result.  

Shrestha et al. (2017) used Convolutional Neural 

Networks (CNNs) to perform authorship 

attribution task of tweets. They used character n-

grams as the feature set and provided a strategy to 

improve model interpretability by estimating the 

importance of input text fragments in the predicted 

classification. The results showed that CNNs 

outperformed the previous methods.  



 

 

3 Corpus Description 

To build the experimental corpus we used some 

sample texts from Salwa’s book “That is how they 

defeat the Despair” (هكذا هزموا اليأس) and sample 

texts from Al-Qarni’s books “Thirty reasons for 

happiness” (ثالثون سبب للسعادة) and “Characters from 

the Holy Quran” (شخصيات من القرآن الكريم). In 

addition, four samples from the disputed text were 

taken from the document produced by Salwa to 

compare the plagiarised text with her book. The 

length of each sample in the corpus was 2000 

words. Table 1 shows the texts which were used in 

the experiments: 

 

Text Book Author 

X_1_1 The disputed 

text 

? 

X_2_1 The disputed 

text 

? 

X_3_1 The disputed 

text 

? 

X_4_1 The disputed 

text 

? 

Q_1_10_15_11 Thirty 

reasons for 

happiness 

Al-Qarni 

Q_1_3_8_1 Thirty 

reasons for 

happiness 

Al-Qarni 

Q_2_30_40_1 Characters 

from the Holy 

Quran 

Al-Qarni 

Q_2_15_25_1 Characters 

from the Holy 

Quran 

Al-Qarni 

Q_2_3_9_1 Characters 

from the Holy 

Quran 

Al-Qarni 

S_30_40_12 That is how 

they defeat 

the despair 

Salwa 

S_45_56_1 That is how 

they defeat 

the despair 

Salwa 

S_15_25_1 That is how 

they defeat 

the despair 

Salwa 

                                                           
1 Q_1_10_15_1 means the sample was taken from the first book of Alqarni pages 

from 10 to 15 

S_60_71_1 That is how 

they defeat 

the despair 

Salwa 

S_90_100_1 That is how 

they defeat 

the despair 

Salwa 

Table 1:  Corpus Description. 

 

In these experiments, we used Principal 

Components Analysis (PCA) to find whether the 

disputed texts would cluster with Al-Qarni’s texts 

or with Salwa’s text. We also used cluster analysis 

using the hierarchical agglomerative algorithm and 

the classic Delta intertextual distance measurement 

to cluster the texts according to textual similarity 

which is a proxy for writing style. 

3.1 PCA Analysis Using the Most Frequent 
Words 

Principal component analysis (Everitt, 2006) is a 

feature extraction technique. Sets of features (such 

as most frequent words) tend to co-occur in similar 

documents, and together they make up a principal 

component. This technique can be used to reduce 

the dimensionality of many variables by ranking 

and sequentially extracting the components 

according to how much they contribute to the 

overall variance in the model.  The features which 

show up more in a specific group of texts and show 

up less in another group are used to discriminate 

between the texts. PCA is very useful when we 

have little data, and we had few texts to compare 

between Salwa’s style and Al-Qarni’s style. It 

would have been better if we could have used all 

the texts from the book La-Tayaas, but the decision 

of the court made it very difficult to find the whole 

book. Thus we used the texts which were produced 

by Salwa to compare her book with Al-Qarni’s 

book and used the PCA technique to extract the 

most important features from these texts. The 

initial feature set which we used to discriminate 

between the two authors was the most frequent 

words. Figure 1 shows that the disputed texts 

which were represented by X_1, X2_1, X3_1, and 

X4_1 were placed on the right-hand side together 

with Salwa’s samples. It is possible to plot the texts 

and the words which most characterize them on the 

same graph. Words which occur frequently in the 

texts are plotted near those texts, and those which 

2 S_30_40_1 means the sample was taken from Salwa’s book pages from 30 to 40 



 

 

occur infrequently in those texts are plotted far 

away. The axes show how correlated the texts and 

words are with each principal component. In figure 

1, the most useful extracted words are shown 

together with the different samples. Figure 1 shows 

that the writing styles of Salwa and Al-Qarni can 

be distinguished by the words of the first principal 

component, since Al-Qarni’s texts appear on the 

left, and Salwa’s texts (including the disputed 

samples) appear on the right. The following list of 

words was seen on Salwa's side: 

 :غير /Not :لم / Which is :أنه/ Before :قبل / With :مع 

Except /في: In / إليه: To / بين: Between /كل: All /التي: 

Which was/ كانت: Was / لها: For it  

This list of words was seen on Alqarni's side: إن: 

So / إذا: If / أو: Or / عند: Have / فال: Not/  لك: For 

you/ علي: On/ الي: To/ هذا: This/ ال: Not / بها: On 

that/ كيف: How/  هو: He/ يا: Oh /إال: Except/ وما: 

And not/ وقال: Said/  يقول: Is saying/  لما: When.  

 

 
Figure 1: PCA including the MFW 

3.2 PCA Using Morphemes  

In this experiment we used the Farasa tool 

(Abdelali et al., 2016) to extract the different 

morphemes contained in words as the feature set to 

discriminate between the two authors. For example 

the following morphemes ( ت /ب/ ها    were (ه /

observed on Salwa’s side on the graph, while the 

morphemes ( ل  /وا ف  / ون  / ) were on Alqarni’s side. 

The following PCA graph (figure 3) shows the 

results obtained using this feature set. Once again, 

the disputed texts appeared on Salwa’s side of the 

graph, showing that they were written in her 

writing style.  

 

Figure 2 PCA using morphemes 

3.3 Cluster Analysis Using the Most 
Frequent Words 

In this experiment we used the Hierarchical 

Agglomerative Clustering Algorithm (HACA) 

(Everitt, 2005) to cluster the texts according to 

style. The most frequent words were used as a 

feature set and the classic Delta measure was used 

to measure the distance between the different texts. 

HACA displays the texts under analysis in a form 

of upside-down tree called a dendrogram, where 

the leaves are the texts and the branches show the 

distances between them. Thus, texts in a similar 

writing style will be placed close together, and 

dissimilar texts will be placed far apart.  From 

figure 4, it is clear that the disputed tests X_1, X_2, 

X3_, and X_4 were clustered under the same 

branch which contained Salwa’s samples. In 

addition to that, the samples were mixed with 

Salwa’s samples, and they did not form a subset 

group. The samples which were taken from Al-

Qarni’s books were clustered together, and as we 

can see the samples from the first book formed a 

subset group and the samples from the second book 

also did so. This indicates that the stories of the 

“successful people” were taken from the book 

together with Salwa’s style and very little 

paraphrasing was done for the texts. Salwa stated 

that she collected these stories and wrote them 

using her style to motivate the readers, and Al-

Qarni took her effort without even putting any 

reference. 



 

 

 
 

Figure 3: Cluster analysis using MFW 

4 Conclusion 

In this paper we introduced a recent case which 

occurred between two Saudi writers. Al-Qarni who 

is a very famous writer in Saudi Arabia was found 

guilty after the young female writer Salwa 

introduced a case against him to the court. To 

investigate Salwa’s claim we collected some texts 

written by Al-Qarni and others written by Salwa to 

find which texts the disputed texts were more 

similar to. We used different features including 

single words, and morphemes contained in words. 

In addition, two different methods were used to do 

the analysis namely Hierarchical Agglomerative 

Clustering Analysis and Principal Component 

Analysis.  

To sum up, Al-Qarni confirmed that the stories 

were taken from Salwa’s book as the designated 

student for the task of collecting them took all the 

stories from one source which was Salwa’s book. 

This was a problem mentioned by Al-Qarni 

himself, but another problem was that, as we can 

see from the results above, the collected stories 

were included in Al-Qarni’s book without doing 

more paraphrasing to reproduce the stories in Al-

Qarni’s writing style.  This made Salwa’s 

fingerprint still visible in the texts, as we saw when  

the disputed texts clustered together with the texts 

in Salwa’s branch of the HACA dentrogram, and 

the disputed texts appeared on Salwa’s side of the 

PCA plot.  

References 

Abbasi, Ahmed, and Hsinchun Chen. "Applying 

authorship analysis to extremist-group web forum 

messages." IEEE Intelligent Systems 20, no. 5 

(2005): 67-75. 

Abdallah, Mariam. 2019. Academic Theft!. [online] 

Muftisays.com. Available at: 

https://www.muftisays.com/forums/77-taqleed--

the-straight-path/9852-academic-theft.html 

[Accessed 27 Feb. 2019]. 

Abdelali, Ahmed, Kareem Darwish, Nadir Durrani, 

and Hamdy Mubarak. "Farasa: A fast and furious 

segmenter for arabic." In Proceedings of the 2016 

Conference of the North American Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics: 

Demonstrations, pp. 11-16. 2016. 

AbdulRazzaq, Ammar Adil, and Tareef Kamil 

Mustafa. "Burrows-Delta Method Fitness for 

Arabic Text Authorship Stylometric Detection." 

(2014). 

Albadarneh, Jafar, Bashar Talafha, Mahmoud Al-

Ayyoub, Belal Zaqaibeh, Mohammad Al-Smadi, 

Yaser Jararweh, and Elhadj Benkhelifa. "Using big 

data analytics for authorship authentication of 

arabic tweets." In Proceedings of the 8th 

International Conference on Utility and Cloud 

Computing, pp. 448-452. IEEE Press, 2015. 

Al-Qarni, Aaidh. "Don’t be sad." Saudi Arabia: 

International Islamic Publishing House (2003). 

Burrows, John. "‘Delta’: a measure of stylistic 

difference and a guide to likely authorship." 

Literary and linguistic computing 17, no. 3 (2002): 

267-287. 

Eder, Maciej, Jan Rybicki, and Mike Kestemont. 

"Stylometry with R: a package for computational 

text Analysis." R journal 8, no. 1 (2016). 

El-Fiqi, Heba, Eleni Petraki, and Hussein A. Abbass. 

"A computational linguistic approach for the 

identification of translator stylometry using Arabic-

English text." In 2011 IEEE International 

Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE 2011), 

pp. 2039-2045. IEEE, 2011. 

Everitt, Brian S. An R and S-PLUS® companion to 

multivariate analysis. Springer Science & Business 

Media, 2006. 

Hadjadj, Hassina, and Halim Sayoud. "Towards an 

authorship analysis of two religious documents." In 

2016 8th International Conference on Modelling, 

Identification and Control (ICMIC), pp. 369-373. 

IEEE, 2016. 

Ouamour, Siham, and Halim Sayoud. "Authorship 

attribution of ancient texts written by ten arabic 

travelers using a smo-svm classifier." In 2012 

International Conference on Communications and 

Information Technology (ICCIT), pp. 44-47. IEEE, 

2012. 

Pasha, Arfath, Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Mona T. 

Diab, Ahmed El Kholy, Ramy Eskander, Nizar 

Habash, Manoj Pooleery, Owen Rambow, and Ryan 



 

 

Roth. "Madamira: A fast, comprehensive tool for 

morphological analysis and disambiguation of 

arabic." In LREC, vol. 14, pp. 1094-1101. 2014. 

 

Rabab'ah, Abdullateef, Mahmoud Al-Ayyoub, Yaser 

Jararweh, and Monther Aldwairi. "Authorship 

attribution of Arabic tweets." In 2016 IEEE/ACS 

13th International Conference of Computer 

Systems and Applications (AICCSA), pp. 1-6. 

IEEE, 2016. 

Sayoud, Halim. "Authorship classification of two old 

arabic religious books based on a hierarchical 

clustering." In Workshop Organizers, p. 65. 2012. 

Sayoud, Halim. "AUTHORSHIP DISCRIMINATION 

ON QURAN AND HADITH USING 

DISCRIMINATIVE LEAVE-ONE-OUT 

CLASSIFICATION." (2017). 

Shrestha, Prasha, Sebastian Sierra, Fabio Gonzalez, 

Manuel Montes, Paolo Rosso, and Thamar Solorio. 

"Convolutional neural networks for authorship 

attribution of short texts." In Proceedings of the 

15th Conference of the European Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 

2, Short Papers, pp. 669-674. 2017. 


