



















































Modeling MWEs in BTB-WN


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multiword Expressions and WordNet (MWE-WN 2019), pages 70–78
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

70

Modeling MWEs in BTB-WN∗

Laska Laskova, Petya Osenova, Kiril Simov, Ivajlo Radev, Zara Kancheva
IICT-BAS

Sofia, Bulgaria
{laska|petya|kivs|radev|zara}@bultreebank.org

Abstract

The paper presents the characteristics of the
predominant types of MultiWord expressions
(MWEs) in the BulTreeBank WordNet – BTB-
WN. Their distribution in BTB-WN is dis-
cussed with respect to the overall hierarchi-
cal organization of the lexical resource. Also,
a catena-based modeling is proposed for han-
dling the issues of lexical semantics of MWEs.

1 Introduction

In this paper we present the distribution and treat-
ment of MultiWord Expressions (MWEs) within
BTB-WN — a data-driven Bulgarian WordNet.1

Currently BTB-WN contains about 22 000 synsets
covering CoreWordNet synsets, all the content
words within BulTreeBank (about 8 000 lemmas)
and the top part of a frequency list over 70 million
running words. For the purpose of this work we
use two subsets: (1) the current version of BTB-
WN; and (2) a subset mapped to the Bulgarian
Wikipedia in order to establish a connection be-
tween the lexical information in BTB-WN and the
encyclopedic knowledge — (Simov et al., 2019).
The second set is used to evaluate the impact of
the encyclopedic domain on the distribution of the
MWEs. From the first subset 981 examples of
MWEs have been extracted, while from the sec-
ond one – 506 examples.

In the past few years extensive literature has
been dedicated to MWEs. In spite of that there
is no single guiding principle or widely accepted
classification, since MWEs are not homogeneous
and can be classified at different levels that interact
in various ways: morphology, lexicology, syntax,
and semantics. Also, the typology becomes more

∗Laska Laskova and Petya Osenova are also affiliated at
Sofia University "St. Kl. Ohridski", Faculty of Slavic Stud-
ies.

1For more information on the creation and development
of BTB-WN see (Osenova and Simov, 2018a).

complex at a cross-language level due to the differ-
ing approaches to MWEs and differing language
systems. For that reason we rely on the classifica-
tion2 developed within WG 4 of PARSEME COST
Action.3 This classification takes into account the
part-of-speech of the MWE head which in our
view is suitable for the treatment of MWEs in
wordnets. Thus, it categorises the MWEs into the
following types: Nominal (Named Entities, NN
compounds, other), Verbal (phrasal verbs, light
verb constructions, VP idioms, other), Adjectival,
Prepositional and Other.

We focus on modeling compositionality of
MWEs as reflected in their morphosyntactic and
semantic properties. With respect to semantics
we follow (Bentivogli and Pianta, 2004) in requir-
ing the representation of both types of meanings
– a) related to the whole MWE and b) related to
its constituent words. Such an approach is espe-
cially important for cases when the MWE allows
also a fully compositional usage. For example,
the classical MWE “kick the bucket” comprises an
idiomatic meaning, but in an appropriate context
it might have also a compositional (literal) usage.
We differ from the above mentioned authors, since
we do not introduce a new relation for handling
compositionality composed-of, but directly an-
notate the corresponding words within the MWE
with their literal meaning.4 As a modelling device
for these MWEs we extend the catena framework
of (Osenova and Simov, 2018b), since this ap-
proach can handle the morphosyntactic behaviour
as well as the compositionality issues sourcing
from semantics. The novelty here is that the focus
is put on the incorporation of the lexical meaning

2http://clarino.uib.no/iness/page?
page-id=MWEs_in_Parseme

3https://typo.uni-konstanz.de/parseme/
4We do not presuppose a definition for a literal meaning

so that the annotators can decide themselves in each case.

http://clarino.uib.no/iness/page?page-id=MWEs_in_Parseme
http://clarino.uib.no/iness/page?page-id=MWEs_in_Parseme
https://typo.uni-konstanz.de/parseme/


71

coming from the WordNet into the catena model.
The structure of the paper is as follows: the

next section outlines the related work; Section 3
presents a classification of the MWEs in BTB-
WN. Section 4 proposes an extension of the catena
model that incorporates lexical semantics. Section
5 concludes the paper.

2 Related Work

(Constant et al., 2017) elaborate on the diversity
of the MWEs and the schemes for their catego-
rization. The article lists the most commonly seen
categories of MWEs: idioms; light-verb construc-
tions; verb-particle constructions; noun and verb
compounds; complex function words; multiword
named entities and multiword terms. The authors
note that these categories are non-exhaustive and
can overlap. Recently, the work on identifica-
tion of MWEs continued with a focus on Ver-
bal MWEs. The 2018 edition of the shared task
PARSEME (Ramisch et al., 2018) relied on en-
hanced and revised guidelines defining the follow-
ing verbal MWEs typology: light-verb construc-
tions; verbal idioms; inherently reflexive verbs;
verb-particle constructions; multi-verb construc-
tions; inherently clitic verbs; inherently adposi-
tional verbs. Here we do not go into such a de-
tailed typology, thus relying on the more general
verbal classification from the PARSEME WG 4
presented briefly above.

As already mentioned, our approach is simi-
lar to the one proposed in (Bentivogli and Pi-
anta, 2004). They consider the addition of syn-
tagmatic information to WordNet by providing co-
occurrences of meanings within a MWE. In or-
der to do this they related each noun, verb, adjec-
tive or adverb in a given MWE with the appropri-
ate synset via the new relation composed-of.
In addition to MWEs the authors proposed to in-
clude Recurrent Free Phrases in WordNet that are
completely compositional, but have some addi-
tional features that distinguish them from the arbi-
trary compositional phrases. These features might
source from additional knowledge carried by the
phrase, or from statistically idiosyncratic patterns.
The grouping of the phrases by their meaning has
been called a phraset. The phrasets are useful not
only by providing co-occurrences of meanings for
their constituent words, but also in multilingual
settings where they might fill lexical gaps. Also
they are useful in NLP tasks such as Word Sense

Disambiguation, Machine Translation, etc. A sim-
ilar approach to MWEs has been undertaken also
in the creation of the Basque WordNet — (Agirre
et al., 2006). As already mentioned above, we do
not introduce a new relation, but directly annotate
the words in MWEs with the appropriate literal
meanings. Furthermore, we do not restrict the an-
notation only to the compositional parts of MWEs.
Whole MWEs are annotated as well. For the mo-
ment no phrasets have been added to BTB-WN,
but we consider such a step as a good development
in future.

In series of papers (Simov and Osenova, 2014),
(Simov and Osenova, 2015), and (Osenova and
Simov, 2018b) we presented the modeling of
MWEs in terms of catena. These papers demon-
strate how the (partial) variability and composi-
tionality can be represented. The last paper reflects
the multilingual application of the model. In our
work here we extend this model to represent also
the literal meanings of the distinct components in
MWEs.

3 MWE types in BTB-WN

The classification we present preserves the general
grouping of synsets into the four syntactic types
which can be found in Princeton WordNet (PWN)
and other wordnets alike: nominal, verbal, adjec-
tival and adverbial ones. All prepositional MWEs
are classified either as adjectival or as adverbial
MWE. It is worth noting that both phrases – PP
and, less often, AdvP – can be modifiers or ad-
juncts depending on the context. For example, от
първа ръка (“first-hand”) can modify the verb
знам (“know”) (i.e. I know something from first-
hand) and the noun информация (“information”)
(i.e. I have information from first-hand) which de-
notes one of the components involved in the situa-
tion described by the verb.

We examine each of the four subsets for recur-
ring syntactic patterns and evaluate them in terms
of semantic compositionality, grammatical devi-
ation (archaic, morphologically frozen forms in-
cluded), and flexibility — the last one understood
as a complex feature that takes into account mor-
phological variation, word order permutation, and
the possibility to modify the sub-units of a MWE.

It is assumed that MWEs exhibiting the de-
gree of compositionality and flexibility typical for
phrases generated ad hoc in discourse, should
still be included in the lexicon if they are as-



72

sociated with a particular type of genre, speech
act or otherwise conventionalized (Calzolari et al.,
2002). One such example is the terminologi-
cal unit промяна на климата (change of cli-
mate, ‘climate change’), which corresponds to
the two MWE forms in the PWN synset {cli-
mate change, global climate change}. A small
number of the two or three word sequences ex-
tracted from BTB-WN appeared to be marginal
for the MWE spectrum. They were born in the
process of the bidirectional mapping of BTB-WN
and PWN synsets (Simov et al., 2015) as instances
of periphrastic translation; whenever there is no
word or MWE in the target language to express
the concept, dictionaries offer descriptive phrases
whose length and syntactic level of complexity
may vary. Consider these two examples: the
VP гледам гневно of the structural type V +
Adv, ‘look disapprovingly’ which is mapped to the
PWN synset {glower, glare} or the four-word se-
quence казвам|изговарям буква по буква, lit.
‘say|pronounce letter per letter’ which is used to
translate the English verb "spell". While the mean-
ing of both Bulgarian expressions can be derived
from the meaning of their sub-units, the latter is a
collocation, and the former is not.

Type Number %
Total: 981

named entities 117 11.93
A + N 565 57.59
N + PP 79 8.05
N + N 25 2.54
A + N + PP 2 0.20
N + Conj + N 5 0.51
V 124 12.64
PP 27 2.75
Adj 12 1.22
other 25 2.54

Table 1: MWE types distribution in BTB-WN.

The distribution of the various structural types
within BTB-WN resource shows a slightly bigger
share of the patterns which do not have an N for
a head and the third most numerous group is that
of the verbal MWEs. (see Table 1). Only 2 of the
25 compound noun phrases have not been matched
to a Wikipedia article. In contrast to English, the
NN pattern in Bulgarian is not only rare, but it is
reserved for terms in which at least one of the sub-
units has reduced its semantic transparency, as in

елен лопатар, “fallow deer”, or is foreign уеб
страница, “web page”.

Type Number %
Total: 506

named entities 110 21.74
A5 + N 333 65.81
N + PP 26 5.14
N + N 23 4.55
N + Conj + N 3 0.59
V 4 0.79
PP 5 1.00
AdvP 2 0.36

Table 2: MWEs type distribution in BTB-WN aligned
to the Bulgarian Wikipedia.

In comparison, Table 2 presents the percentage
of the different structural types of MWEs within
the synsets mapped to Wikipedia articles in an ini-
tial attempt to enrich BTB-WN with encyclope-
dic knowledge. Not surprisingly, the first three
most numerous groups are all nominal, which
stems from the fact that Wikipedia articles mainly
cover general concepts and named entities (Mc-
Crae, 2018).

In the following subsections a more detailed de-
scription for each MWE type is provided.

3.1 Multiword Adverbials

With a few exceptions, all of the examined prepo-
sitional phrases are adverbial adjuncts correspond-
ing to a Prep(ositional) head followed by a post-
modifier N(oun) or Adv(erb); in some cases the
second element is modified by another PP or
Adj(ective) — see Table 3.

The opposite, however, is not true —- some of
the adverbial adjuncts follow different syntactic
patterns which often but not always have phonetic,
rhythmic and/or lexical repetition as their common
denominator. This feature is related to the iconic-
ity that reflects the meaning of the MWE (e.g.
examples 9 and 10, and especially 8 where the
two sub-units are nonsensical if not concatenated,
which is to say that they do not have a lemma sta-
tus on their own).

Example 9 – Сегиз-тогиз (lit. “now-then”)
– and example 10 – напред-назад (lit. “forth-
back”) – represent the result of a type of syn-
tactic contraction where the conjunction is omit-
ted. Example 13 represents another typical syn-
tactic transformation that accompanies the process



73

No Expressions Gloss Translation Pattern
1 за жалост ’for pity’ unfortunately Prep + N
2 на ръка ’on hand’ manually Prep + N
3 у дома ’in home-LOC’ at home Prep + N
4 де факто ’de facto’ de facto Prep + N (foreign)
5 за малко ’for little-SG.N’ for a while Prep + Adj
6 по човешки ’on human-SG.M’ humanly Prep + Adj
7 от време на време ’from time to time’ —”— PP + PP
8 чат-пат xx-xx from time to time opaque
9 сегиз-тогиз ’now-then’ from time to time Adv Adv
10 напред-назад ’back-forth’ back and forth Adv Adv
11 очи в очи ’eye-PL in eye-PL’ face to face N + Prep + N
12 живот и здраве ’life and health’ hopefully N + Conj + N
13 известно време ’known time’ for a while Adj N

Table 3: Multiword adverbials and their syntactic patterns.

of lexicalization, i.e. the omission of a preposi-
tion (известно време (certain time) vs. за из-
вестно време (for certain time). Examples 5 and
6 in Table 3 illustrate two productive derivational
models and consequently —- a predictable mul-
tiword time and manner adverbial constructions,
where a fixed preposition (за, “for” or по, “on”)
is followed by an adjective which in turn has to be
semantically and grammatically compatible with
the elliptical head noun (време, “time” and на-
чин, “manner”, respectively). Neither the MWEs
with a prepositional head, nor any of the adver-
bials show any degree of morphosyntactic varia-
tion. All of them have a fixed word order.

3.2 Multiword Adjectives

There are only three MWEs of the PP modifier
type in BTB-WN, на високо равнище, на висо-
ко ниво, “top-level”, and от първа ръка, “first-
hand” which belong to two different synsets. The
rest of the modifiers have as their head a syntac-
tic Adjective (see Table 4), and it is the only sub-
unit subject to morphological modification. Inter-
esting cases are the following ones: example 14
рохко сварен, “soft-boiled” and example 15 доб-
ре дошъл, ”welcome”. The former represents an
interesting example of a MWE that has a limited
selective power, since it typically collocates with
the neutral noun яйце, “egg”. This respectively
narrows down the possible morphological realiza-
tions to two forms, рохко сварен-о ’soft-boiled-
SG.N’ or рохко сварен-и ’soft-boiled-PL’. The
latter is usually predicatively used and referring
to some person. Thus its form depends on the

gender of the referred person and on the singular-
ity/plurality of these objects. Again, the order of
the adjectival MWE elements is fixed.

3.3 Multiword Verbs

The majority of verbal MWEs contain at least one
reflexive se- or si-verb (отморявам си, отдъхна
си, relax), or dative/accusative clitics. 93.83 % of
all verbal MWEs in BTB-WN are of this kind. Al-
though they are often mapped to English phrasal
verbs in translation (Kordoni and Simova, 2014),
we do not consider reflexive verbs and verbs that
include accusative or dative pronominal particles,
such as унася ме, “doze off” or хрумва ми,
“come to mind” as MWEs (for a different ap-
proach see (Ramisch et al., 2018)). Thus, there
are only 124 multiword verbs per se.

Among these 124 verbal phrases we distin-
guished several syntactic patterns as illustrated in
Table 5. Examples 18 and 19 illustrate the light
verb construction, with правя, “make” and во-
дя, “lead” as phrasal heads respectively. An-
other frequent light verb in BTB-WN is давам,
“give”. Typically, light verb MWEs are found in
synsets with verbs that are derived from the nom-
inal sub-unit, e.g. (правя) гаргар-а → гаргар-
я се (make a gargle, to gargle) or vice versa,
e.g. кореспондирам → ( водя) кореспонден-
ция (to correspond, correspondence). In these
cases the two synsets are {правя гаргара, гар-
гаря се} and {водя кореспонденция, корес-
пондирам}. Examples 20 and 24 belong to dif-
ferent structural types but they have one thing in
common, a sub-unit that refers to a body part,



74

No Expressions Gloss Translation Pattern
14 рохко сварен ’soft boiled’ soft-boiled Adv + Adj
15 добре дошъл ’well come’ welcome Adv + Adj
16 труден за разбиране ’difficult for understanding’ baffling Adj + PP
17 загубил надежда ’lost hope’ desperate Adj + N

Table 4: Multiword adjectives and their syntactic patterns.

No Expressions Gloss Translation Pattern
18 правя гаргара ’make gargle’ gargle V + N
19 водя кореспонденция ’lead correspondence’ communicate V + N
20 затварям си устата ’close PTCL.REFL.POSS

the-mouth’ shut up V + N
21 завършвам наравно ’finish equally’ draw a game V + Adv
23 карам с превишена скорост ’drive with exceeded speed’ speed V + PP
24 говоря под носа си ’speak under nose self’ mumble V + PP

Table 5: Multiword verbs and their syntactic patterns.

accompanied by the reflexive possessive marker
si. In example 20 the body part is ‘mouth’ while
in example 24 it is ‘nose’. Even when they are
used in a sentence with a plural subject, the num-
ber of the noun element typically remains sin-
gular, e.g. Затваря-йте си уст-а.та!, ‘Shut-
IMP.2PL PTCL.REFL.POSS mouth-SG.DET’. The
verbal MWEs might allow for adjectival modifica-
tion of their noun elements.

3.4 Multiword Nouns

This type reflects predominantly named entities
and specialized terminological units or everyday
idiomatic phrases. Thus, they can be highly recur-
sive in structure.

In Table 6 the named entity types are presented.
Examples 25–28 list patterns of person names. It
can be seen that the Bulgarian6 pattern of a proper
noun plus adjectival middle and/or family name is
listed in examples 27–28, while in examples 25–
26 the foreign tradition is illustrated of noun-noun
phrases. The names of people are not very fre-
quent in BTB-WN. They are included on the basis
of mappings to English WordNet. In future, we are
planning to extend the coverage of named entities
through Wikipedia and other similar sources.

Examples 29–34 demonstrate patterns for geo-
graphical names. Here the patterns are more di-
verse structurally. The pattern ‘adjective(s) plus
noun’ seems to be regular (examples 29 and 30).
Also, the pattern ‘noun plus (adjective) noun’ (ex-

6Also in some other Slavonic languages.

amples 31 and 32) and the pattern ‘noun plus
prepositional phrase’ can be distinguished (exam-
ple 33). Not surprisingly, there are some names
that are opaque to the Bulgarian morphosyntax
(example 34). From the point of view of the anno-
tation with literal meanings the non-opaque cases
require special attention because of the usage of
common words in them. Components like “strip”
(example 29), “dead” (example 30), and “new”
(example 32) need to be annotated with the ap-
propriate meanings. If we consider “New South
Wales” and “New York”, the adjective “new”
needs to be annotated with two different mean-
ings in the two cases — recently discovered and
recently created.

Examples 35–37 illustrate the organization
names. The observed patterns are: ‘noun plus
prepositional phrase’ (example 35) and ‘adjec-
tive(s) plus noun plus (prepositional phrase)’ (ex-
amples 36 and 37). These names are included in
BTB-WN because of the mapping to the PWN.
Since the organization names could be quite com-
plex, a special (chunk) grammar will be required
to deal with them. The grammar would include
rules for annotating the literal meanings of the
MWE components.

In Table 7 the terms and the everyday idiomatic
phrases are listed. Here the most frequent struc-
tural types are: ‘noun plus noun’ (examples 38–
39); ‘adjective plus noun’ (examples 40–45) and
‘noun plus prepositional phrase’ (examples 46–
47). Most of the examples are compositional. Ex-
ample 39 demonstrates a very productive compo-



75

No Expressions Translation Pattern
25 Франклин Делано Рузвелт Franklin Delano Roosevelt N + N + N
26 Франклин Рузвелт Franklin Roosevelt N + N
27 Никита Сергеевич Хрушчов Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev N + A + A
28 Никита Хрушчов Nikita Khrushchev N + A
29 Ивицата Газа Gaza Strip N + N
30 Мъртво море Dead Sea A + N
31 Република Южна Африка South African Republic N + (A + N)
32 Нов Южен Уелс New South Wales A + (A + N)
33 Стратфорд на Ейвън Stratford-upon-Avon N + PP
34 Буенос Айрес Buenos Aires opaque
35 Общество на народите League of Nations N + PP
36 Европейска централна банка European Central Bank A + N
37 Държавен департамент на САЩ U.S. Department of State A + N + PP

Table 6: Multiword named entities and their syntactic patterns.

No Expressions Translation Pattern
38 сокол скитник peregrine falcon N + N
39 вагон-ресторант dining car N + N
40 детско креватче baby bed A + N
41 рожден ден birthday A + N
42 врабчови чревца chickweed A + N
43 златна среда golden mean A + N
44 добър вечер good evening A + N
45 пирова победа Pyrrhic victory A + N
46 връх на стрела arrowhead N + PP
47 черешката на тортата icing on the cake N + PP

Table 7: Other nominal MWE and their syntactic patterns.

sitional model of noun-noun phrases in Bulgarian.
Examples of this structural type are included in
BTB-WN because they have specific features as
mentioned in the related work — additional world
knowledge associated with them or statistical id-
iosyncratic usage. Similar cases are also examples
40, 41 and 46. They are fully compositional, but
have been included because otherwise there would
exist a lexical gap with respect to the Princeton
WordNet. The examples illustrate phrasets in
BTB-WN. Examples 38 and 42 are respectively
names of a bird and a plant. The meaning of their
components becomes clearer only when additional
knowledge about the bird and the plant are consid-
ered.

The figurative (non-compositional) meaning is
displayed in examples 43, 44, 45 and 47. Example
44 is a diachronic one, but very actively used in
contemporary Bulgarian as a polite greeting. The
other three are idiomatic expressions. In examples
43 and 45 the head nouns determine the whole

meaning of the phrases — “mean” and “victory”
— but the meaning of the whole MWEs is not
compositional because of the missing appropriate
meanings for the adjectives. We do not want to in-
clude such meanings as separate synsets because
of their limited distribution and thus the risk of in-
troducing unnecessary ambiguity.

The presented examples in this section demon-
strate a great diversity with respect to their mor-
phosyntactic, syntactic and semantic characteris-
tics. In the majority of the cases it seems that
the literal meanings of the constituent words of
the MWEs are transparent. This allows for an
easy interpretation of the literal meanings within
the appropriate context. Even when the MWEs
are highly idiomatic, there might exist a context in
which the speaker would refer to the literal mean-
ing of the constituent words.



76

4 Formal Treatment of MultiWord
Expressions in BTB-WN

In order to address the possible variations of the
MWE elements, their potential for morphosyn-
tactic variation and modification, and the lexical
meaning of the MWE being compositional or not,
we rely on the notion of catena.

LC

Vpi Pp Nc
– poss plur|def
– си очите

затварям си око
shut one’s eyes

CNo1 CNo2 CNo3

rootC

clitic

dobj

SM CNo1: { run-away-from_rel(e,x0,x1),
fact(x1), [1](x1) }

Fr

Vpi R N
– – –
– пред –

затварям пред –
shut at –

CNo1 No1 No2

rootC

iobj pobj

semantics: No2: { fact(x), [1] (x) }

Fr

Vpi R N
– – –
– за –

затварям за –
shut for –

CNo1 No1 No2

rootC

iobj pobj

semantics: No2: { fact(x), [1] (x) }

Figure 1: Lexical entry for затварям си очите, “zat-
varyam si ochite”, ‘I close my eyes’.

Let us recall that the notion of catena (chain)
was initially introduced in (O’Grady, 1998) as a
mechanism for representing the syntactic struc-
ture of idioms. He showed that for this task a
definition of syntactic patterns was needed that
does not coincide with constituents. He defined
the catena in the following way: The words A, B,
and C (order irrelevant) form a chain if and only
if A immediately dominates B and C, or if and

only if A immediately dominates B and B imme-
diately dominates C. In our work here we convert
MWEs into a representation previously defined in
(Simov and Osenova, 2014) and (Simov and Osen-
ova, 2015) in which the catena is depicted as a
dependency tree fragment with appropriate gram-
matical and semantic information. The variations
of the MWEs are represented through underspec-
ifying the corresponding features, including va-
lency frames, non-canonical basic form.

The lexical entry uses the following format:
a lexicon-catena (LC), semantics (SM) and va-
lency (Frame). The lexicon-catena for the MWEs
is stored in its basic form. The realization of the
catena in a sentence has to obey the rules of the
grammar. In this way the possible word order is
managed. The semantics of a lexical entry spec-
ifies the list of elementary predicates contributed
by the lexical item. When the MWE allows for
some modification (including adjunction) of its el-
ements, i.e. modifiers of a noun, the lexical entry
in the lexicon needs to specify the role of these
modifiers. For example, the MWE represented in
Fig. 1.7

The valency frame contains two alternative el-
ements for indirect object introduced by two dif-
ferent prepositions. The situation that the two de-
scriptions are alternatives follows from the fact
that the verb has no more than one indirect object.
If there is also a direct object, then the valency set
will contain elements for it as well. The semantic
contribution of the indirect object is specified for
each valency element. This semantic contribution
is added to the semantic contribution of the lexical
entry when the valency element is realized. In the
dependency tree fragments also grammatical fea-
tures and lemmas are represented. The catenae for
the frame and for the whole lexical entry are uni-
fied on the basis of nodes with the same names.

In order to record the meaning of the whole
MWE and the literal meanings of its constituent
words, we extend the above lexical entry in the
following way: The meaning of the whole MWE
is recorded within the field SM as an additional
item. In the case when the predicate semantics (as
in the example) is available, it includes more than
one predicate — one for the meaning of the MWE
and one or more for the “assumed” arguments.

For the literal meanings of the constituent words

7The grammatical features are: ‘poss’ for possessive pro-
noun, ‘plur’ for plural number and ‘def’ for definite noun.



77

we include a new field called constituent word lit-
eral meanings (LM). In Fig. 2 one example is pro-
vided of the new lexical entry for the MWE зат-
варям си устата (close one’s mouth-the) “shut
up”. For the mapping to the synsets we use the cor-
responding meaning from the Princeton WordNet
3.1: shut_up%2:30:00:: — “cause to be quiet
or not talk”; shut%2:35:00:: — “move so that
an opening or passage is obstructed; make shut”;
and mouth%1:08:01:: — “the opening through
which food is taken in and vocalizations emerge”.
Thus, through the WordNet mappings both – figu-
rative and compositional – meanings are provided.

LC

Vpi Pp Nc
– poss sing|def
– си устата

затварям си уста
shut one’s mouth

CNo1 CNo2 CNo3

rootC

clitic

dobj

SM CNo1: { shut-up_rel(e,x0) }
Synset: shut_up%2:30:00::

Fr
LM затварям : shut%2:35:00::

уста : mouth%1:08:01::

Figure 2: Lexical entry for затварям си устата (close
one’s the-mouth) “shut up”.

5 Conclusions

In this paper we presented the typology and the
characteristics of the MWEs in BTB-WN. Near
400 Bulgarian MWEs were encoded as lexical en-
tries based on the catena model. This fact shows
that the model is feasible not only for modeling
Bulgarian MWEs but also for describing MWEs
in other languages.

The approach that was taken in this work re-
flects the intuition of the human annotators to as-
sign literal meanings to the constituent elements
in MWEs even when they are highly idiomatic.
In our work up to here no examples were found
where one or more of the elements lack a literal
meaning.

A more balanced and incremental view on the
compositionality has been introduced since lan-
guage is highly generative and might provide also
contexts in which some of the literal meanings

were triggered. An open question is the han-
dling of ambiguity when the respective element
has more than one literal meaning.

Acknowledgments

This research was funded by the Bulgarian Na-
tional Science Fund grant number 02/12/2016
— Deep Models of Semantic Knowledge (De-
moSem). The contribution of Ivajlo Radev and
Zara Kancheva has been partially supported by
the Bulgarian Ministry of Education and Science
under the National Research Programme “Young
scientists and postdoctoral students" approved by
DCM # 577 / 17.08.2018. We are grateful to
the anonymous reviewers for their remarks, com-
ments, and suggestions. All errors remain our own
responsibility.

References
Eneko Agirre, Izaskun Aldezabal, and Eli Pociello.

2006. Lexicalization and Multiword Expressions in
the Basque WordNet. In Proceedings of Third Inter-
national WordNet Conference, pages 131–138.

Luisa Bentivogli and Emanuele Pianta. 2004. Extend-
ing Wordnet with Syntagmatic Information. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Global WordNet Conference,
pages 47–53.

Nicoletta Calzolari, Charles J. Fillmore, Ralph Gr-
ishman, Nancy Ide, Alessandro Lenci, Catherine
MacLeod, and Antonio Zampolli. 2002. Towards
Best Practice for Multiword Expressions in Compu-
tational Lexicons. In Proceedings of the Third In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’02), Las Palmas, Canary Islands
- Spain. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Mathieu Constant, Gülşen Eryiğit, Johanna Monti,
Lonneke van der Plas, Carlos Ramisch, Michael
Rosner, and Amalia Todirascu. 2017. Multiword ex-
pression processing: A survey. Computational Lin-
guistics, 43(4):837–892.

Valia Kordoni and Iliana Simova. 2014. Multiword Ex-
pressions in Machine Translation. In LREC, pages
1208–1211.

John P. McCrae. 2018. Mapping WordNet Instances to
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 9th Global Word-
Net Conference., pages 62–69.

William O’Grady. 1998. The Syntax of Idioms. Natu-
ral Language and Linguistic Theory, 16:279–312.

Petya Osenova and Kiril Simov. 2018a. The datadriven
Bulgarian WordNet: Btbwn. Cognitive Studies |
Études cognitives, 18.

http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2002/pdf/259.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2002/pdf/259.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2002/pdf/259.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1162/COLI_a_00302
https://doi.org/10.1162/COLI_a_00302
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.11649/ cs.1713
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.11649/ cs.1713


78

Petya Osenova and Kiril Simov. 2018b. Modelling
Multiword Expressions in a Parallel Bulgarian-
English Newsmedia Corpus. Multiword expres-
sions: Insights from a multi-lingual perspective,
pages 247—-269.

Carlos Ramisch, Silvio Ricardo Cordeiro,
AgataSavary, Veronika Vincze, Verginica Barbu
Mititelu, Archna Bhatia, Maja Buljan, Marie
Candito, Polona Gantar, Voula Giouli, Tunga
Gungor, Abdelati Hawwari, Uxoa Inurrieta, Jolanta
Kovalevskaite, Simon Krek, Timm Lichte, Chaya
Liebeskind, Johanna Monti, Carla Parra Escartın,
Behrang QasemiZadeh, Renata Ramisch, Nathan
Schneider, Ivelina Stoyanova, Ashwini Vaidya, and
Abigail Walsh. 2018. Edition 1.1 of the Parseme
SharedTask on Automatic Identification of Verbal
Multiword Expressions. In Proceedings of the Joint
Workshop on Linguistic Annotation, Multiword
Expressions and Construction, pages 222—-240.

Kiril Simov and Petya Osenova. 2014. Formalizing
Multiwords as Catenae in a Treebank and in a Lex-
icon. In Verena Henrich, Erhard Hinrichs, Daniël
de Kok, Petya Osenova, Adam Przepiórkowski (eds.)
Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Work-
shop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT13),
pages 198–207.

Kiril Simov and Petya Osenova. 2015. Catena Oper-
ations for Unified Dependency Analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Conference on
Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 320–
329, Uppsala, Sweden. Uppsala University, Upp-
sala, Sweden.

Kiril Simov, Petya Osenova, Laska Laskova, Ivajlo
Radev, and Zara Kancheva. 2019. Aligning the Bul-
garian BTB WordNet with the Bulgarian Wikipedia.
In Proceedings of the 10th Global WordNet Confer-
ence.

Kiril Simov, Alexander Popov, and Petya Osenova.
2015. Improving Word Sense Disambiguation with
Linguistic Knowledge from a Sense Annotated Tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence Recent Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 596–603.

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1182603
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1182603
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1182603
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-2135
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-2135

