




















































Copula and Case-Stacking Annotations for Korean AMR


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 128–135
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

128

Abstract 

This paper concerns the application of 
Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) 
to Korean. In this regard, it focuses on the 
copula construction and its negation and 
the case-stacking phenomenon thereof. To 
illustrate this clearly, we reviewed 
the :domain annotation scheme from 
various perspectives. In this process, the 
existing annotation guidelines were 
improved to devise annotation schemes 
for each issue under the principle of 
pursuing consistency and efficiency of 
annotation without distorting the 
characteristics of Korean. 

1 Introduction 

Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) 
(Banarescu et al., 2013) is a framework suitable 
for integrated semantic annotation. When 
localizing AMR annotation guidelines (Banarescu 
et al., 2018) for Korean, it is vital to maximize the 
use of existing annotation conventions widely 
accepted in English, Chinese, and other languages 
to ensure high compatibility between the AMR 
corpora of each language. 

However, current AMR annotation guidelines 
are geared to English vocabulary and grammatical 
phenomena. Therefore, it is necessary to devise 
semantic annotation schemes for Korean AMR 
that reflect existing annotation guidelines as much 
as possible while accurately representing the 
characteristics of Korean. This paper reviews 
annotation methods for several grammatical 
phenomena that are the characteristics of Korean 
and presents guidelines thereof. Section 3 presents 
an annotation method for consistently 
representing the copula ‘-이-(-i-)’ in the Korean 
                                                           
† corresponding author 

copula construction and the lexical negation 
‘아니-(ani-; to be not)’. Copula constructions in 
Korean are formed through the copula ‘-이-(-i-)’; 
in this regard, it is necessary to establish 
annotation guidelines considering its negation, 
relativization, and complementization. Section 4 
presents a case-stacking annotation method 
representing two or more subjects or objects. 
Case-stacking in Korean is a phenomenon in 
which several nominative or accusative words are 
licensed to a single predicate, and they have a 
pragmatic and semantic relationship with each 
other.  

Regarding such issues, it would be helpful to 
boost Korean sembanking by properly adjusting 
AMR annotation standards and Korean-specific 
grammar phenomena to increase annotation 
efficiency.  

2 Predicate Annotation  

The first problem to consider for representing 
Korean sentences through AMR is determining 
what language resources to use in the annotation 
of core semantic roles. AMR uses the frameset of 
the Proposition Bank (PropBank) (Palmer et al., 
2005) to represent the meaning of sentences, 
while Chinese AMR (CAMR) uses the Chinese 
PropBank (Xue & Palmer, 2009) frameset (Li et 
al., 2016). Brazil-Portuguese AMR (AMR-BR) 
uses the VerboBrasil dataset (Duran et al., 2013) 
as its annotation resource, which was built 
through the PropBank-BR project (Duran & 
Alu ́ısio, 2012) promoted after the PropBank 
initiative. (Anchiêta & Pardo, 2018) 

The Korean PropBank (Palmer et al., 2006) 
consists of the Virginia corpus and the Newswire 
corpus; the Newswire corpus comprises 2,749 
predicates attached to more than 23,000 semantic 
roles. (Bae & Lee, 2015) Given that most 
languages, including Spanish (Migueles-Abraira 

Copula and Case-Stacking Annotations for Korean AMR 
 
 

Hyonsu Choe1,  Jiyoon Han1,  Hyejin Park2,  Hansaem Kim3† 

1Interdisciplinary Graduate Program of Linguistics and Informatics, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea 
2Department of Korean Language and Literature, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea 
3Institution of Language and Information Studies, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea 

{choehyonsu, clinamen35, hjp1010, khss}@.yonsei.ac.kr 
 
 



129

et al., 2018), have adopted the PropBank, the use 
of the Korean PropBank is a top priority when 
representing Korean AMR. Most importantly, 
annotating frame-arguments according to the 
PropBank convention facilitates alignment with 
AMRs in other languages; compatibility with 
AMR corpora in many languages is 
advantageous. 

However, as the lists of predicates and 
predicate senses in each language do not coincide 
with each other, detailed annotation guidelines 
may vary. For example, when applying the way of 
representing copula constructions and its negation 
with AMR in other languages to Korean copula 
constructions, problems arise in case of dealing 
with the predicate ‘아니-(ani-)’, which is the 
lexicalized form of ‘-이-(-i-)’ and means “to be 
not.” Therefore, it is necessary to present a 
rational guideline considering the annotation 
methods of the general copula construction in 
Korean. 

3 Copula Constructions  

As AMR strives to represent the abstract meaning 
of language expressions, it is recommended to 
annotate the actual meaning of the copula 
construction to clarify the actual meaning rather 
than annotate the syntactic structure. Most copula 
constructions can be annotated using existing 
frames with well-defined arguments and semantic 
roles. For example, (1) is an annotation of the 
“NP is NP” construction using work-01 to place 
the focus on meaning. 
 
(1) The boy is a hard worker. 
 
(w / work-01  
     :ARG0 (b / boy)  
     :manner (h / hard-02)) 

 
 
However, for annotating some “Noun is noun” 
constructions or predicate adjectives with no 
available frame, the English specification 
proposes an annotation using :domain and its 
inverse role, :mod, for unspecified modification 
(often modifying a noun) and the like by 
relativization. In these cases, as there is no frame 
available, it is difficult to represent the meaning of 
the expression clearly. Annotating with :domain 
and :mod is a simpler and more efficient way to 
handle the cases for which annotators cannot 

decide a proper way of representation, while it is 
a less interpretive representation. 

 
(2) a. The man is a lawyer. 
 
(l / lawyer 
     :domain (m / man)) 

 
 

b. The man who is a lawyer 
 

(m / man 
       :mod (l / lawyer)) 

 
In (2), the annotation of “The man is a lawyer” 
and its relativization is shown. Here, as there is no 
frame for ‘lawyer’, :domain and its inverse 
role, :mod, are used for annotation. 

In reality, AMR for several languages makes 
limited use of :domain only if there is no 
available frame. In CAMR, when representing the 
sentences with the main verb “是,” which 
functions as a copula, :domain is defined as a 
non-core role relation used in attribution and 
jurisdiction as in (3). However, as representing 
meaning by :domain is more ambiguous, it was 
found that the use of :domain gradually 
decreased as the labeling process continued. Thus, 
as the labeling process proceeded, the emphasis 
was placed on annotations that clearly reveal the 
semantic relationship rather than those close to 
the sentence format.  
 
(3) 他是班长。 

‘He is a leader.’ 
 
(x0 / 班长 

     :domain (x1 / 他) 

 
 
The annotation of the Korean copula construction 
should also clearly reveal the meaning of the 
sentence. In subsequent sections, we will examine 
the usage of the copula ‘-이-(-i-)’ in Korean and 
briefly propose a proper way to annotate each 
usage. We will also examine cases in which we 
are forced to annotate with :domain and discuss 
special considerations for these cases. Next, we 
examine cases in which the negation of the copula 
construction is realized through the predicate ani-, 
and how to deal with the cases where the 
conceptual annotation is difficult.  



130

3.1 Annotation of Copula -i- 
Korean copula ‘-이-(-i-)’, unlike “be”, which is a 
verb in English sentences, combines directly with 
the content word to form the predicate and is 
conjugated. In Korean, the usage of the copula ‘-
이-(-i-)’ is largely classified into the following: ⅰ) 
class membership (ascriptive), ⅱ) identity and 
identification, ⅲ) locational, ⅳ) existential, ⅴ) 
presentational, ⅵ) temporal, ⅶ) quantificational, 
ⅷ) cleft sentence and ⅸ) relatedness and 
illogical usage. (Park, 2012) 

Most of these uses can be represented through 
verbalization, non-core roles, special frames, and 
the like. For example, in the case of ⅰ), it can be 
represented through :subset, :consist-of, 
and have-org-role-91; :location for ⅲ) 
and ⅳ); first-class concept and date-entity 
for ⅴ) and ⅵ); and :quant for ⅶ). Further, (4a) 
is an AMR using frame 담당-01 (to be in charge 
of), and (4b) is simply represented with non-core 
roles. 
 
 

(4) a. 그 부분이 내 담당이다. 
geu   bubun-i        nae    damdang-i-da. 

              that    part-NOM      my      charge-COP-DECL 
‘I am in charge of that part.’  

  
(담 / 담당-01|to be in charge of 
    :ARG0 (나 / 나|I) 
    :ARG1 (부 / 부분|part 
        :mod (그 / 그|that))) 

 
 

b. 사무실에 프린터가 세 대다. 
samusil-e    peulinteo-ga      se       dae-(i)-da. 
office-in        printer-NOM        three    unit-COP-DECL 
‘There are three printers in the office.’ 

 
(프 / 프린터|printer 
     :location (사 / 사무실|office) 
     :quant 3) 

 
 
The relativization of the copula construction 
annotated using :domain is annotated 
with :mod, the inverse role of :domain (as 
shown in (5)). 
 
 
 
 
 

(5) 변호사인 그는 아직 미혼이다.  
byeonhosa-i-n         geu-neun  ajik   mihon-i-da. 
lawyer-COP-PART     he-ADP      yet     unmarried-COP-DECL 
‘The man who is a lawyer is not married yet.’ 

 
(결 / 결혼-01|marry  
     :polarity - 
     :mod (아 / 아직|yet) 
     :ARG0 (그 / 그|the man 

:mod (변 / 변호사|lawyer))) 
 
 
However, interpretive annotation is not 

possible in all cases. In certain cases of ⅰ), ⅱ), ⅷ), 
and ⅸ), annotations by :domain may be 
inevitable. Types ⅰ) and ⅱ) roughly correspond to 
cases where there is no available frame, while 
ⅷ) and ⅸ) correspond to cases where there is a 
presupposed context or it is a focus construction. 
In these cases, :domain is used. In (6), as there 
is no way of knowing the “best option” is for 
what, there is a limit to fully revealing the 
meaning.  

 
 

(6) 정직하게 얘기하는 것이 최선의 선택이다. 
jeongjik-ha-ge   yaegi-ha-neun   geos-i         choeseon-ui 
seontaeg-i-da. 
honest-do-PART   talk-do-PART       thing-NOM  best-GEN 
options-COP-DECL 
‘That talking honestly is the best option.’ 

 
(선 / 선택|option 
  :mod (최 / 최선|best) 
  :domain (이 / 이야기-01|to talk 
    :manner (정 / 정직-01|to be honest)) 

 

3.2 Copula -i- with ani- Negation 
Korean copula ‘-이-(-i-)’ does not function as 

an independent morpheme but constitutes a 
predicate with preceding words. In contrast, the 
negation of ‘-이-(-i-)’ is realized by lexical 
negation with the adjective predicate ‘아니-(ani-)’ 
or syntactically realized with ‘-(이)지 않- (-(i)ci 
anh-)’. ‡ If the difference in the meaning of the 
proposition of the copula construction and its 
negation is the presence or absence of negation, 
then in general situations, it is desirable to 
annotate negation only with :polarity -. 
                                                           
‡  Syntactic negation '-(이)지 않- (-(i)ci anh-)' is not 
mentioned in this paper. Further works will be followed on 
the negation of Korean. 



131

Below, (7) is a representation of a sentence in 
which the negation of (4a) is realized through 
‘아니-(ani-)’. Compared to (4a), the only 
difference is the presence or absence of 
the :polarity - annotation. 
 
 
(7) 그 부분은 내 담당이 아니다. 

geu   bubun-eun   nae   damdang-i     ani-da. 
that    part-ADP       my     charge-ADP     NEG-DECL 
‘I am not in charge of that part.’ 

 
(담 / 담당-01| 
     :polarity - 
     :ARG0 (나 / 나|I) 
     :ARG1 (부 / 부분|part 
         :mod (그 / 그|that))) 

 
 
Even if the representation of the copula 
construction uses :domain, the :polarity - 
annotation can be used. For example, (8b) shows 
a sentence in which the negation of (8a) is 
realized through ‘아니-(ani-)’. Similarly, 
compared to (8a), the only difference is the 
presence or absence of the :polarity - 
annotation. (Note that there is no frame 
unavailable for predication, “문제(이)다(munje-
(icop)-da; to be problematic)” 
 

 
(8) a. 빙하가 녹는 것은 문제다. 

bingha-ga     nog-neun   geos-eun  munje-(i)-da. 
glacier-NOM  melt-PART  thing-ADP  problem-COP-DECL 
‘That glaciers are melting is a problem.’ 

 
(문 / 문제|problem 
     :domain (녹 / 녹-01|to melt 
          :ARG1 (빙 / 빙하|glacier))) 
 
 
b. 빙하가 녹는 것은 문제가 아니다.  

bingha-ga      nog-neun     geos-eun      munje-ga  
ani-da. 
glacier-NOM    melt-PART    thing-ADP      problem-ADP 
NEG-DECL 
‘That glaciers are melting is not a problem.’ 

 
(문 / 문제|problem 
     :polarity - 
     :domain (녹 / 녹-01|to melt 
          :ARG1 (빙 / 빙하|glacier))) 

 
 

However, there are cases in which the meaning 
changes when the core frame arguments of 
predicate ‘아니-(ani-)’ are inverted. For example, 
(9b) is a sentence in which the argument from 
9(a) is simply replaced, which can change the 
meaning of the sentence. Here, simply annotating 
with :polarity - can pose a problem. It is 
difficult to view (9b) as the negative construction 
of (8a). 
 
 
(9) a. 빙하가 녹는 것은 문제가 아니다. → ‘That 

glaciers are melting is not a problem. (~ is not 
problematic.)’ 

 
b. 문제는 빙하가 녹는 것이 아니다. → ‘The 
problem is not (the event) that glaciers are melting. 
(The problem is the other one.)’ 

 
 
In addition, if the meaning of (9b) differs from 
that of (9a), then the representations should not be 
the same. To represent (9b) as a trial, (10) 
assigns :polarity - to “빙하가 녹는 것 (That 
glaciers are melting),” a thing in a predicate. 
However, the annotation of (10) is closer to 
“문제는 빙하가 녹지 않는 것이다. (The problem is 
(the event) that glaciers are NOT melting)” rather 
than the meaning of (9b). 
 

 
(10) An inappropriate representation of (9b):  
문제는 빙하가 녹는 것이 아니다. 
munje-neun     bingha-ga     nog-neun    geos-i  
ani-da. 
problem-ADP    glacier-NOM   melt-PART   thing-ADP 
NEG-DECL 
‘The problem is not (the event) that glaciers are 
melting.’ 

 
 (녹 / 녹-01|to melt 
     :polarity - 
     :ARG1 (빙 / 빙하|glacier) 
     :domain (문 / 문제|problem)) 

 
 

In this case, annotation with :polarity - is 
not appropriate. The Korean PropBank provides 
the frame 아니-01 (to be not) for the predicate 
ani-, whose usage seems appropriate. 아니-01 
has two core semantic roles; :ARG1(subj) is 
assigned to “thing in focus” and :ARG2(comp) is 
assigned to “thing in predication.” This method is 



132

an appropriate alternative when it is not enough to 
only add the :polarity - to the AMR of the 
copula construction to represent the meaning of 
the ani- construction. Example (11) is an 
annotation of (9b) using frame 아니-01. The 
representation of (11) is not the same as that of 
(10). 

 
(11) More appropriate representation of (9b) with 

frame 아니-01: 
 
문제는 빙하가 녹는 것이 아니다. 
munje-neun     bingha-ga      nog-neun    geos-i  
ani-da. 
problem-ADP    glacier-NOM    melt-PART    thing-ADP 
NEG-DECL 
‘The problem is not (the event) that glaciers are 
melting.’ 

 
(아 / 아니-01|to be not 
     :ARG1 (문 / 문제|problem) 
     :ARG2 (녹 / 녹-01|to melt 
          :ARG1 (빙 / 빙하|glacier))) 
 

Moreover, when the ‘아니-(ani-)’ construction is 
relativized, the annotation standard of the copula 
construction is considered. However, it should be 
noted that during complementation, frame 아니-
02 (besides that) is used as in (12b). 
 
 (12) a. 전혀 문제가 아닌 상황  

jeonhyeo  munje-ga        ani-n            sanghwang 
totally         problem-ADP   NEG-PART    situation 
‘The situation that is not an issue at all.’ 

 
(상 / 상황|situation 

     :mod (문 / 문제|problem 
         :polarity - 
         :mod (전 / 전혀|totally))) 

 
 

b. 억울한 사람은 다른 사람이 아닌 바로 
나다.  

eogul-han     salam-eun     daleun      salam-i          
ani-n             balo      na-(i)-da. 
wrong-PART  person-ADP    different      person-ADP 
NEG-PART    exactly    me-COP-DECL 
‘The wronged person is none other than me.’ 

 
(억 / 억울-01|to feel wronged 

:ARG1 (나 / 나|I 
      :mod (아 / 아니-02|besides that 
        :ARG0 (사 / 사람|person 

           :ARG1-of (다 / 다르-01|to be  
different 

))))) 

It is preferable to annotate the presence or 
absence of :polarity - based on the same 
proposition of the copula construction and its 
negation. This will ensure that the propositions of 
the affirmative and negative constructions are 
aligned with one another. In addition, when the 
copula construction or its negated sentence is 
relativized, the propositions must also be aligned 
with each other. The use of the frames 아니-01 
or 아니-02 is highly limited to cases in which the 
meaning of the sentence changes, which is due to 
the characteristics of the predicate ‘아니-(ani-)’. 

4 Case-stacking 

Korean is a SOV (subject-object-verb) language 
with case markers. The agent and patient are 
placed before the predicate, and word order 
constraints are loose because of the presence of 
case markers. Therefore, Korean sentences 
generally rely on the case markers to encode and 
decode the grammatical relationships and 
semantic roles of the arguments.  

Korean has sentence types including the so-
called double nominative construction (DNC) and 
double accusative construction (DAC). (Brown & 
Yeon, 2015) In DNC and DAC, the nominative 
marker ‘-이(-i)`가(-ga)’ or the accusative marker 
‘-을(-eul)/-를(-leul)’ is licensed to two or more 
constituents in a sentence. 

There are several types of double case marker 
construction. DNC can be classified as embedded 
sentences, psychological adjective constructions, 
numeral phrase constructions, complement 
constructions, complex predicate constructions, 
etc. (Lee, 2018) As for complement constructions, 
specific predicates such as '되-(become)' and 
'아니-(be not)' constitute 'NP1-이/가(-i/ga) NP2-
이/가(-i/ga) V' sentence structure. In this structure, 
'NP2' can be classified as a complement (not the 
subject), and second '-이/가(-i/ga)' as a 
complementary case marker.  

In the case of DAC, it can be classified as 
possessive constructions, locative alternation 
constructions, change-of-state constructions, 
numeral phrase constructions, support verb 
constructions, etc. (Shin, 2016)  

The numeral phrase construction is included in 
both DNC and DAC, which can be represented in 
AMR easily by :quant. Two constituents which 
are marked by the same case marker generally 
have different grammatical and semantic relation. 



133

These double case marker constructions are 
conventionally called 'double subject/object 
construction', while there is still room for 
argument about whether both constituents with 
the same marker are both subject or object. 

In DNC and DAC, the two subjects or two 
objects are usually divided into “inner-nominative 
and accusative” and “outer-nominative and 
accusative,” with a semantic and discourse 
relationship therebetween. As a result, there is 
generally a word order constraint between the two 
constituents.  

In Korean, the predicate of a double 
nominative construction is often an adjective. 
Although there are various types of Korean 
nominative case-stacking constructions, 
(Wunderlich, 2014) this paper discusses only 
those for predicate clause and psychological 
adjective constructions. (Yoo, 2000) Korean also 
has several types of accusative case-stacking 
constructions. However, this paper discusses only 
the annotations of constructions corresponding to 
two objects with a whole-part relationship or 
dative verb constructions.§ (Yeon, 2010) 

First, this section analyzes the sentence 
structure of DNC through the major subject 
(outer-nominative) and sentential predicate (a 
clause in which inner-nominative and predicate 
are embedded). We propose using :domain for 
the major subject that is the topic of a discourse of 
the sentential predicate. This annotation method is 
very efficient because it can be applied repeatedly, 
even when the subject appears more than once. A 
frame 좋-01 (to be good) in (13) takes only one 
subject that stands for “thing being good”; two or 
more subjects appear in real text. Here, the outer 
nominative was annotated with :domain as the 
main subject. 

 
 

(13) 기계가 상태가 좋다.  
gigye-ga            sangtae-ga          joh-da. 
machine-NOM     condition-NOM     good-DECL 
‘The condition of the machine is fine.’ 

 
(좋 / 좋-01|to be good 
    :ARG1 (상 / 상태|condition) 
    :domain (기 / 기계|machine)) 
 

                                                           
§  Other types of Korean nominative case-stacking 
constructions or accusative case-stacking constructions are 
not mentioned in this paper. 

However, the use of :domain still needs to be 
limited in double nominative constructions. A 
better representation with :time clearly reveals 
the meaning as in (14).  

 
(14) 어제가 날씨가 더웠다.  

eoje-ga               nalssi-ga         deo-woss-da. 
yesterday-NOM   weather-NOM    hot-PAST-DECL 
‘The weather of yesterday was hot.’ 

 
 (덥 / 덥-01|to be hot 
    :ARG1 (날 / 날씨|weather) 
    :time (어 / 어제|yesterday)) 

 
In adjective constructions in which nominative 
case-stacking occurs, attention should be paid to 
the annotation according to predicate sense. In 
(15), which uses a psychological adjective rather 
than a qualifying adjective, while nominative 
case-stacking occurs, the semantic role of each 
constituent corresponds to agent and patient. If 
predicate senses vary, the core argument 
annotation should differ, corresponding to a role 
set of the frame.  

 
(15) 나는 그가 좋다. 

na-neun    geu-ga      joh-da. 
I-ADP        he-NOM     like-DECL 
‘I like him.’   

 
(좋 / 좋-02|to like 
    :ARG0 (나 / 나|I) 
    :ARG1 (그 / 그|he)) 
 

Multiple accusative case licensing in DAC 
usually involves paraphrasing adnominal 
possessive structures; there are many cases in 
which possessor raising occurs. (Nakamura, 
2002) If it is difficult to clarify the relationship 
between two accusatives, it is convenient to 
use :domain as in (16), but if not, it is important 
to clarify the meaning. Example (17) annotates 
the relationship between “발톱 (claw)” and 
“고양이 (cat)” using :part-of, without 
using :domain. 
 
(16) 제비를 꽝을 뽑았다. 

      jebi-leul    kkwang-eul    ppob-at-da. 
      lot-ACC      blank-ACC      draw-PAST-DECL 

‘I drew a blank lot.’ 
 
(뽑 / 뽑-01|to draw 
     :ARG1 (꽝 / 꽝|blank) 
     :domain (제 / 제비|lot)) 



134

 
(17) 그녀는 고양이를 발톱을 잘라 주었다. 

    geunyeo-neun   goyangi-leul   baltob-eul     jal-la 
 ju-eot-da. 
she-ADP              cat-ACC            claw-ACC      cut-PART 
AUX-PAST-DECL 
‘She cut the cat’s claws.’ 

 
(자 / 자르-01|to cut 
   :ARG0 (그 / 그녀|she) 
   :ARG1 (발 / 발톱|claw 
      :part-of (고 / 고양이|cat))) 

 
However, in dative constructions in which the 
dative case or accusative case appears, the 
annotation of the frame argument must be noted.  
 
 
(18) 할머니는 아끼던 구두를 나를 주셨다. 
          halmeoni-neun         akki-deon      gudu-leul     na-leul 

ju-sy-eot-da. 
grandmother-ADP         spare-PART     shoes-ACC    me-ACC 
give-HON-PAST-DECL 
‘My grandmother gave me the shoes I loved.’ 

 
(주 / 주-01|to give 
   :ARG0 (할 / 할머니|grandmother) 
   :ARG1 (구 / 구두|shoes 
      :ARG1-of (아 / 아끼-01|spare) 
   :ARG2 (나 / 나|I))  

 

5 Conclusion and Further Works 

This paper discussed consistent annotation 
methods for the Korean copula construction, its 
negation, complementation, and relativization 
with focus on the copula ‘-이-(-i-)’ and the 
predicate ‘아니-(ani-)’. In this process, we also 
demonstrated cases in which annotation must be 
performed using the frames 아니-01 and 아니-
02. 

In addition, we proposed a new usage 
for :domain with regard to case-stacking, which 
occurs in Korean sentences frequently. While its 
limited usage is recommended, in cases in which 
there are two or more subjects or objects when 
there is no available frame for the sentential 
predicate, it can be used repeatedly.  

The annotation guideline of the Korean copula 
construction presented in this paper is essentially 
based on the copula construction annotation 
standards of other languages. However, as 
indicated in the limited discussion of the predicate 
‘아니-(ani-)’, devising consistent annotation 

principles for scopal polarity remains a topic for 
future discussion. Accordingly, it is necessary to 
examine various aspects of negative 
representation more broadly than those discussed 
in this paper. Besides, as the usage of :domain 
slightly expands, the usage of :domain 
and :mod label in terms of the determination of a 
topic of discourse and modifications should also 
be considered. This discussion will enable the 
AMR scheme to represent the semantics of 
Korean more explicitly. 

In the future, we aim to build a Korean AMR 
corpus reflecting these discussions. For this task, 
the consistency and efficiency of the annotation 
guidelines need to be improved. Also, well-
established language resources are required to 
reduce cost and efforts to build an actual Korean 
AMR corpus. 

Currently, the following language resources 
which are labeled with semantic roles are 
available in Korean: UCorpus-DP/SR & 
UPropBank of Ucorpus (Released by KLPLAB, 
University of Ulsan) and SRL datasets of 
Exobrain Language Analysis Corpus v4.0 
(Released by Seoul SW-SoC Convergence R&BD 
Center, ETRI). The UCorpus uses an extended set 
of theta roles from Sejong Electronic Dictionary 
and The Exobrain Corpus follows the annotation 
system of Korean Proposition Bank.  

The next step of this research is to construct a 
Korean AMR corpus by converting the existing 
Korean semantic resources followed by correcting 
it manually. This further work to construct Korean 
AMR corpus would provide detailed guidelines, 
which could stimulate future studies in Korean 
sembanking.  

 

 References  
Anchiêta, R., & Pardo, T., 2018, Towards AMR-BR: 

A SemBank for Brazilian Portuguese Language. In 
Proceedings of the Eleventh International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC-2018). 

Bae, J., & Lee, C., 2015, Extending Korean PropBank 
for Korean Semantic Role Labeling and Applying 
Domain Adaptation Technique. Korean Journal of 
Cognitive Science, 26(4), 377-392. 

Banarescu, L., Bonial, C., Cai, S., Georgescu, M., 
Griffitt, K., Hermjakob, U., ... & Schneider, N., 
2013, Abstract meaning representation for 
sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic 

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1157
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1157
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-2322
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-2322


135

Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with 
Discourse, 178-186. 

Banarescu, L., Bonial, C., Cai, S., Georgescu, M., 
Griffitt, K., Hermjakob, U., Knight, K., Koehn, P., 
Palmer, M., Schnetder, N., 2018. Abstract Meaning 
Representation (AMR) 1.2.6 Specification. 
Accessed: 1 may 2019. Available at: 
https://github.com/amrisi/amr-
guidelines/blob/master/amr.md 

Brown, L., & Yeon, J. (Eds.)., 2015, The handbook of 
Korean linguistics. John Wiley & Sons. 

Duran, M. S. and Alu´ısio, S. M., 2012. Propbank-br: 
a brazilian treebank annotated with semantic role 
labels. In Proceedings of the 8th international 
conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation, pages 1862–1867.  

Duran, M. S., Martins, J. P., and Alu´ısio, S. M., 
2013. Um repositorio de verbos para a anotac¸ ´ ao 
de pap ˜ eis ´ semanticos dispon ˆ ´ıvel na web. In 
Proceedings of the 9th Brazilian Symposium in 
Information and Human Language Technology, 
pages 168–172. 

Lee, Y., 2018, A syntactic analysis of so-called 
double-subject construction, Morphology, 20.2, 
202-231. 

Li, B., Wen, Y., Weiguang, Q. U., Bu, L., & Xue, N., 
2016, Annotating the little prince with chinese 
AMRs. In Proceedings of the 10th linguistic 
annotation workshop held in conjunction with ACL 
2016 (LAW-X 2016), 7-15. 

Migueles-Abraira, N., 2017, A Study Towards 
Spanish Abstract Meaning Representation. MSc 
thesis, University of the Basque Country.  

Migueles-Abraira, N., Agerri, R., & de Ilarraza, A. 
D., 2018, Annotating Abstract Meaning 
Representations for Spanish. In Proceedings of the 
Eleventh International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2018). 

Nakamura, H., 2002, Double subject, double 
nominative object and double accusative object 
constructions in Japanese and Korean. In 
Proceedings of the 16th Pacific Asia Conference 
on Language, Information and Computation, 358-
369. 

Palmer, M., Gildea, D., & Kingsbury, P., 2005, The 
proposition bank: An annotated corpus of semantic 
roles. Computational linguistics, 31(1), 71-106. 

Palmer, M., Ryu, S., Choi, J., Yoon, S., & Jeon, Y., 
2006, Korean propbank. LDC Catalog No.: 
LDC2006T03 ISBN, 1-58563. 

Park, J., 2012, Semantic description of lexical and 
grammatical elements in Korean using semantic 

map model. Journal of Korean Linguistics, 63, 
459-519. 

Shin, S., 2016, A study on the functions of eul/reul 
through examining double accusative 
constructions: focusing on transitivity, Urimalgeul: 
The Korean Language and Literature, 68, 1-35.  

Wunderlich, D., 2014, Variations of double 
nominative in Korean and Japanese. Studies in 
Language and Cognition, 339.  

Xue, N., Palmer, M., 2009, Adding semantic roles to 
the Chinese Treebank. Natural Language 
Engineering, 15(1):143-172. 

Yeon, J., 2010, Constraints on double-accusative 
external possession constructions in Korean: A 
cognitive approach. In: Yeon, Jaehoon and Kiaer, 
Jieun, (eds.), Selected Papers from the 2nd 
European Conference on Korean Linguistics. 
Lincom Europa. (Lincom Studies in Asian 
Linguistics) 

Yoo, H., 2000. A study on the classification of Korean 
adjectives. Journal of Korean Linguistics, 36, 221-
258.  

 

https://github.com/amrisi/amr-guidelines/blob/master/amr.md
https://github.com/amrisi/amr-guidelines/blob/master/amr.md
https://github.com/amrisi/amr-guidelines/blob/master/amr.md
https://github.com/amrisi/amr-guidelines/blob/master/amr.md
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/papers/L/L12/L12-1114/
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/papers/L/L12/L12-1114/
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/papers/L/L12/L12-1114/
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-1702
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-1702
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1486
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1486
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/Y02-1034
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/Y02-1034
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/Y02-1034
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J05-1004
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J05-1004
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J05-1004
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2006T03

	1 Introduction
	2 Predicate Annotation
	3 Copula Constructions
	3.1 Annotation of Copula -i-
	3.2 Copula -i- with ani- Negation

	4 Case-stacking
	5 Conclusion and Further Works
	References

