



















































Multiple Admissibility: Judging Grammaticality using Unlabeled Data in Language Learning


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 12–22,
Florence, Italy, 2 August 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

12

Multiple Admissibility in Language Learning:
Judging Grammaticality Using Unlabeled Data

Anisia Katinskaia, Sardana Ivanova, Roman Yangarber
University of Helsinki, Department of Computer Science, Finland

first.last@helsinki.fi

Abstract

We present our work on the problem of detec-
tion Multiple Admissibility (MA) in language
learning. Multiple Admissibility occurs when
more than one grammatical form of a word fits
syntactically and semantically in a given con-
text. In second-language education—in partic-
ular, in intelligent tutoring systems/computer-
aided language learning (ITS/CALL), systems
generate exercises automatically. MA implies
that multiple alternative answers are possi-
ble. We treat the problem as a grammatical-
ity judgement task. We train a neural network
with an objective to label sentences as gram-
matical or ungrammatical, using a “simulated
learner corpus”: a dataset with correct text
and with artificial errors, generated automat-
ically. While MA occurs commonly in many
languages, this paper focuses on learning Rus-
sian. We present a detailed classification of
the types of constructions in Russian, in which
MA is possible, and evaluate the model using
a test set built from answers provided by users
of the Revita language learning system.

1 Introduction

The problem of Multiple Admissibility (MA) oc-
curs in the context of language learning. In
“cloze” exercises (fill-in-the-blank), the learner re-
ceives a text with some word removed, and a base
form1 of the removed word as a hint. The task is to
produce the correct grammatical form of the miss-
ing word, given the context. The answer given by
the user is checked automatically by the language
learning system. Therefore, the system should
be able to accept more than one answer, if there
are grammatically and semantically valid alterna-
tives in the given context. Otherwise, the language
learning system returns negative (actually incor-
rect) feedback to the learner. This is a problem,

1The base or “dictionary” form will be referred to as
lemma in this paper.

because negative feedback for an acceptable an-
swer misleads and discourages the learner.

We examine MA in the context of our language
learning system, Revita (Katinskaia et al., 2018).
Revita is available online2 for second language
(L2) learning beyond the beginner level. It is in
use in official university-level curricula at several
major universities. It covers several languages,
many of which are highly inflectional, with rich
morphology. Revita creates a variety of exercises
based on input text materials, which are selected
by the users. It generates exercises and assesses
the users’ answers automatically.

For example, consider the sentence in Finnish:
“Ilmoitus vaaleista tulee kotiin postissa .”
(“Notice about elections comes to the house in the
mail.”)

In practice mode, Revita presents the text to the
learner in small pieces—“snippets” (about 1 para-
graph each)—with all generated exercises. This
is important, because grammatical forms in exer-
cises usually depend on a wider context.

For the given example, Revita can generate
cloze exercises hiding several tokens (surface
forms) and providing their lemmas as hints:

“Ilmoitus vaali tulla koti posti .”

(“Notice election come house mail .”).
For the verb ”tulla” (”come”) and nouns ”vaali”

(“election”), ”koti” (“home”) and ”posti” (”mail”)
the learner should insert the correct grammatical
forms. Revita expects them to be the same as the
forms in the original text, and will return negative
feedback otherwise. However, in this example,
postitse (“via email”) is also acceptable, although
it is not in the original text.

The MA problem is also relevant in the context
of exercises that require a free-form answer, such
as an answer to a question or an essay. The learner

2https://revita.cs.helsinki.fi/

https://revita.cs.helsinki.fi/


13

can produce “unexpected” but nevertheless valid
grammatical forms.

In the current work, we restrict our focus to
MA of multiple surface forms of the same lemma,
given the context; we do not consider synonyms,
which can also fit the same context. The latter
topic is part of the future work.

The structure of the paper is as follows: In sec-
tion 2 we formulate the problem and provide a de-
tailed classification of the types of MA found in
the learner data. In section 3 we describe our ap-
proach, in particular, the procedure for generating
artificial grammatical errors and creating test sets.
Section 4 presents previous work on artificial er-
ror generation. Section 5 describes our model and
experimental setup. In section 6 we discuss the re-
sults and error analysis, and conclude in section 7.

2 Multiple Admissibility: Problem
Overview

We use data from several hundred registered stu-
dents learning Russian (and other languages),
practicing with exercises based on texts, or an-
swering questions in test sessions. Currently, Re-
vita does not provide a mode for written essays,
because it does not check free-form answers.

Except for cloze exercises, Revita also gener-
ates exercises where the users are asked to se-
lect among various surface forms based on a given
lemma—a correct surface form and a set of auto-
matically generated distractors; or to type the word
they hear. This allows us to collect a wide range
of errors, though not all kinds of possible errors;
e.g., currently we do not track punctuation errors,
word order errors, insertion errors, errors resulting
from choosing an incorrect lemma, etc.

We annotated 2884 answers from the Revita
database, which were automatically marked as
“not matching the original text.” This work
was done by two annotators (90% agreement)
both with native-level competency in Russian, and
background in linguistics and teaching Russian.
Among all annotated answers, 7.5% were actu-
ally correct, but differed from the original text.
Also, we checked answers given by three students
with C1 CEFR proficiency level in Russian (es-
tablished independently by their teachers); 15.8%
of these answers were grammatically and seman-
tically valid in the context. Thus, for advanced
users, the problem of MA is twice as relevant as on
average; we plan to investigate these results with a

larger base of Revita users.

2.1 Types of Multiple Admissibility
In analyzing the answers given by our users, we
discovered several types of the most frequent con-
texts where MA appears.

Present/Past tense: The most clear case of MA
in Russian (as in many other languages) is the case
of interchangeable forms of present and past tense
of verbs. Russian has three tenses (present, past,
future), of which past and future tenses can have
perfective or imperfective aspect.

In the next example, if both verbs are chosen
for as exercises3 and the learner sees two lem-
mas (”задержаться” and ”вернуться”), she has
a possibility to produce verb forms in any tense de-
pending on the context beyond the given sentence.
It may be narrative past tense or present tense, or
the text may be a message where the communica-
tive goal of the speaker is to inform the reader
about future events, so future tense is expected.

“Мы задержались(PST)4 у друзей и
вернулись(PST) домой поздно.”
“We were delayed with friends and returned
home late.”

The following option may be acceptable:

“Мы задержались(PST) у друзей и
вернемся(FUT) домой поздно.”
“We were delayed with friends and
will return home late.”

The future cannot precede the past in this sen-
tence, so the next variant answer is grammatically
incorrect:

* “Мы задержимся(FUT) у друзей и
вернулись(PST) домой поздно.”
“We will be delayed with friends and
returned home late.”5

Some cases are more difficult because the
choice of tense can depend on knowledge beyond
the text:

“Ученым удалось установить, что
у минойцев существовало (PST)
несколько видов письма.”

3If one of the verbs is chosen as an exercise, the user may
get a hint from the surface form of the other verb, that they
should be coordinated.

4We use standard abbreviations from the Leipzig
Glossing Rules.

5*Star is used to mark an incorrect sentence.



14

“Scientists were able to establish that the Mi-
noans had several types of writing systems.”

In a non-fictional narrative, only the past tense
can be used, since the Minoans do not exist in the
present. These examples show that deciding which
tenses are acceptable in the context is difficult.

Singular/Plural: Singular and plural nouns can
be grammatically valid in the same context, if
there is no dependency on words beyond the sen-
tence boundaries. For instance:

“Из последних разработок—скафандр
для работы (SG.) в открытом космосе.”
“Из последних разработок—скафандр
для работ (Pl.) в открытом космосе.”
“From the latest developments—the space-
suit for work in open space.”

Short/Full adjective:6 in many constructions,
short and full forms of adjectives can be used as a
part of a compound predicate (Vinogradov, 1972).
The difference between these is that the short form
typically expresses temporal meaning and that it
is a phenomenon of literary language, whereas its
full alternative form sounds more colloquial.

“Вы ужасно болтливы (short) и
непоседливы “ (short) (from I. Bunin)
“You are being terribly talkative (PRED) and
restless (PRED).”
“Вы ужасно болтливые и
непоседливые” .
“You are terribly talkative (DESCR) and
restless (DESCR)”.

We treat these examples as MA, because even
for native Russian speakers in many cases the
choice can be unclear. So it would be too strict
to treat one of the variants as incorrect.

Nominative/Instrumental case: nouns as part
of compound named predicates can be in the nom-
inative or instrumental case. The difference in
meaning is similar to that of short/full adjectives
(Rosenthal et al., 1994): nominative indicates a
constant feature of a subject, whereas instrumen-
tal indicates a temporary feature of a subject. We
consider the following examples as MA, because
of a subtle difference in meaning:

“Она была загадочная (NOM) и
непонятная (NOM) для меня”. (from I.
Bunin)

6So-called full/short forms of adjectives correspond to de-
scriptive/predicative adjectives in other languages: compare
“the hungry(DESCR) dog” vs. “the dog is hungry(PRED)”.

“Она была загадочной (INS) и
непонятной (INS) для меня”.
“She was mysterious and incomprehensible
to me”.

Genitive/Accusative case: usage of genitive
vs. accusative is a complex topic, beyond the
scope of this paper. We mention a few examples
briefly, where MA can appear—denotation of a
part of the whole and negation. Usually the gen-
itive is used to denote a part of the whole. In the
following example, usage of the accusative is in-
correct:

“Пожалуйста, отрежь хлеба” (GEN)
* “Пожалуйста, отрежь хлеб” (ACC)
“Please, cut some bread.”

In some contexts both meanings are possible—
of a part and of the whole—resulting in MA:

“Нам оставили хлеба и вина” (GEN)
“We were left with some bread and wine.”

“Нам оставили хлеб и вино” (ACC)
“We were left with bread and wine.”

If both words appear in exercises, Revita should
accept genitive or accusative (if the context speci-
fies the expected meaning nowhere else).

The next case is negation constructions. The
genitive is usually used where negation is stressed,
whereas the accusative weakens the negation,
(Rosenthal et al., 1994). However, it is worth
noticing that the difference can be difficult to un-
derstand even for native Russian speakers.

“До вас никто еще этого браслета
(GEN) не надевал.” (from Kuprin.)
“No one has worn this bracelet before you.”

Compare with a similar example in the accusative:

“Он не отвергнул тогда с презрением
эти сто (ACC) рублей.” (Dostoevsky)
“He did not reject those one hundred rubles
with contempt.”

It is not always possible for the learner to know
which case expected in the sentence, because it
implies that she should know which type of nega-
tion was mentioned. always possible, and both op-
tions fit semantically.

Perfective/Imperfective aspect: errors in as-
pect are very common (Rozovskaya and Roth,



15

2019). Without going into detail, we show ex-
amples from (Rakhilina et al., 2014)—a heritage
learner corpus.7 Both sentences can be interpreted
as correct, with a subtle difference in meaning:

“Он пишет ей, чтобы она не перестала
(PFV) любить его.”
“He writes to her that she should not stop lov-
ing him.”
“Он пишет ей, чтобы она не переставала
(IPFV) любить его.”
“He writes to her that she continue to love
him.”

Gerund/Other verb forms: MA occurs in
some contexts where gerunds are used. In the fol-
lowing example, both sentences can express the
meaning of two actions happening at the same
time. The only argument against using a past tense
verb form is that it sounds somewhat unnatural
without a conjunction ”and” between verbs (”was
saying and thinking”):

“... говорил я себе, думая (GERUND)
об Охотном ряде” (from Bunin)
“... I was saying to myself, thinking about
Okhotny Ryad”
“... говорил я себе, думал (PST) об
Охотном ряде”
“... I was saying to myself, was thinking
about Okhotny Ryad”

Prepositions with multiple cases: some prepo-
sitions can govern two different cases of the fol-
lowing noun, with no change in meaning:

“Она спряталась под одеялом.” (INS)
“Она спряталась под одеяло.” (ACC)
“She hid under a blanket.”

Second Genitive (Partitive): and other forms
common in spoken language can be valid alterna-
tives, often unfamiliar to L2 learners.

“Я привозил ей коробки шоколаду
(2GEN), новые книги...”
“Я привозил ей коробки шоколада
(GEN), новые книги...”
“I was bringing her boxes of chocolate, new
books...”

7Heritage learners are persons with a cultural con-
nection to or proficiency in the language through fam-
ily, community, or country of origin. (Definition from
http://www.cal.org/heritage/research/)

Other cases: some examples of MA contexts
are exceptionally interesting and rare.

“На этой почве хорошо росла трава, что
обеспечивало (Neu) пастбищами овец.”
“На этой почве хорошо росла трава, что
обеспечивала (Fem) пастбищами овец.”
“The grass grew well on this soil, what
provided sheep with pasture.”

These sentences expresses similar meaning, al-
though the verb “обеспечивать” (“to provide”)
appears in the neuter gender in the first and fem-
inine in the second. This happens because in
the first sentence the subordinative pronoun “что”
(“which”) refers to the entire preceding clause,
whereas in the second it refers only to the word
“трава” (“grass”), which is feminine.

We observe many other types of constructions
with MA. This is not an exhaustive list, but covers
only some of the types actually found among the
answers given by the learners of Russian in Revita.
The list should give us some intuitions about the
problem of MA, and how difficult it is to identify
automatically.

3 Overview of the Approach

How can we identify instances of Multiple Admis-
sibility? One approach to this problem is to train
a model with a language modeling objective—
referred to as “LM-trained” in the literature. In
such a scenario, the task of the model is to pre-
dict the next word at every point in the sentence,
e.g., for the sentence ”The keys to the cabinet
[is/are] here”8 the task of the model is to pre-
dict that P (are|C) > P (is|C), where C is the
context. Linzen (2016) experimented with this
kind of language modeling in three setups: with-
out any grammatically relevant supervision, with
supervision on grammaticality (predicting which
of two sentences9 is grammatical/ungrammatical),
and number prediction—predicting between two
classes, ”singular” or ”plural”. The last two setups
are strongly supervised. The poorest results were
obtained using a LM-trained model, despite using
a large-scale language model (Jozefowicz et al.,
2016).

Later, Gulordava (2018) reevaluated these re-
sults for the task of predicting long-distance agree-
ment: for several languages, including Russian,

8The example is from (Linzen et al., 2016).
9”The keys to the cabinet are here” vs. ”The keys to the

cabinet is here”



16

an LM-trained RNN approached the accuracy of
the supervised models described in (Linzen et al.,
2016). Marvin (2018) performed a targeted evalu-
ation of several LMs—N-gram, LM-trained RNN,
and Multitask RNN10—on the task of detecting er-
rors in several grammatical constructions for En-
glish.11 The results of even the strongest LM var-
ied considerably depending on the syntactic com-
plexity of the construction: 100% accuracy in the
case of simple subject-verb agreement, and 0.52%
accuracy for subject-verb agreement across an ob-
ject relative clause (without “that”).

In light of these results from prior research, we
decided to approach the problem as a supervised
grammaticality judgement task—a two-class clas-
sification task, (Linzen et al., 2016)).

Since MA answers are correct answers, sen-
tences with alternative grammatical forms of the
same lemma would be grammatically correct. One
of the problems with this approach is the lack of
annotated training data. The Revita database had
only 7156 answers labeled “incorrect” for Rus-
sian, at the time when these experiments began.
Therefore we generated a training dataset by sim-
ulating grammatical errors. We describe the sim-
ulation procedure in the following subsection, and
briefly review prior approaches to generating ar-
tificial errors for grammatical error detection and
correction tasks (GED/GEC). Every instance in
the simulated dataset is labeled as correct or in-
correct. The network reads the entire sequence in
a bidirectional fashion and receives a supervised
signal at the end. We describe the model and the
experiments in the following sections.

3.1 Generating Artificial Errors

First, we describe the process of generating train-
ing data: the source of data, preprocessing steps
and a brief analysis of what types of errors we ob-
tain in the simulated data. In the following sub-
section, we proceed to describe the test sets which
were build from real users’ data containing “natu-
ral” errors.

Generating training datasets with artificial er-
rors is a common approach, because obtaining
large error-annotated learner corpora is extremely
difficult and costly, (Granger, 2003): difficulties

10Language modeling objective, combined with a super-
vised task of sequence tagging with CCG supertags.

11The authors expected that a LM would assign a higher
probability to a grammatical sentence than to an ungrammat-
ical one.

relate to collecting data from language learners
and very expensive annotation procedures.

Revita at present creates exercises only for
words which do not exhibit lemma ambiguity (ho-
mography).12 Lemma ambiguity occurs when
a surface form has more than one lemma. An
example of this type of ambiguity is the token
“стекло”, which has two morphological analyses:

стечь (“to flow down”) Verb+Past+Sing+Neut,
стекло (“glass”) Noun+Sing+Nom/Acc.13

In this setting, we do not need to generate errors
for surface forms with lemma ambiguity.

Training instances are generated by sliding a
window of radius r over the list of input tokens,
with the target token in the middle. The target is
every n-th token (n is the stride). If the target to-
ken is unambiguous, is above a frequency thresh-
old,14 and has a morphological analysis, it is re-
placed by a random grammatical form from the
paradigm to which the token belongs.15

We use r = 10, which results in a window
wider than an average sentence in Russian, and we
are interested in including wide context in training
instances. All generated windows are labeled as
negative/ungrammatical. The training dataset con-
sists of a balanced number of grammatical and un-
grammatical instances. Part of the generated data
was removed from training dataset and used as a
validation set for training the model.

Of the automatically generated errors that we
checked, some appear very natural, while others
may be less likely to be made by real students.

As Linzen (2016) notes, some of the gener-
ated instances will not in fact be ungrammatical.
We analysed 500 randomly chosen generated win-
dows; 3% of them happened to be grammatical (in
Table 1 we refer to them as Multi-admissible). We
provide the interpretation for all labels in Table 1
in the following subsection.

3.2 Test Data Analysis

To create test sets, we took 2884 answers from Re-
vita’s database, which were automatically marked
as “incorrect,” and manually annotated them using
the labels below:

12Because it currently does not attempt to perform disam-
biguation, and only one lemma can be shown as the hint.

13This is an example not only of lemma ambiguity, but also
of word sense and morphological ambiguity.

14We count frequencies from the entire corpus used for
building the training set, to exclude words appearing once.

15We generate paradigms of inflected words using the py-
morphy2 morphological analyzer (Korobov, 2015).



17

Label (1) Training set (2) Real student data (3) Advanced students
Grammatical error 83.0% 21.4% 39.4%
Non-word error — 20.8% 12.2%
Multiple-choice — 12.0% 17.0%
Multi-admissible 3.0% 7.5% 15.8%
Pragmatic error 2% 1.6% 2.9%
Broken 12% 36.7% 12.7%
Total instances annotated 500 2884 170

Table 1: Data we annotated for verification and testing: (1) subset of the set of errors automatically generated for
training (randomly sampled and manually annotated), (2) learners’ answers (randomly sampled), marked by the
System as incorrect, (3) subset of learner’ incorrect answers—for advanced learners only (CEFR level C1/C2).
“Broken”: discarded instances (technical problems, too many unknown words, numbers, punctuation marks, etc.)

• Grammatical error: answer was a valid gram-
matical form of the word (exists in paradigm), but
incorrect in the given context. This group includes
only errors made in cloze exercises.
• Non-word error: spelling error—the word was
rejected by the morphological analyzer.
•Multiple-choice: error in a choice of word from
a list of options.
•Multi-admissible: as mentioned above, we con-
sider these to be correct answers.
• Pragmatic error: a separate type of error where
the given answer can fit grammatically, but is se-
mantically/pragmatically unnatural in the context.

We provide one example of the last kind of er-
ror; it requires further investigation:

“У меня машина сломалась, и мне
пришлось звонить в автосервис (ACC)”.
“My car broke down and I had to call (to)
the auto repair”.

* “У меня машина сломалась, и мне
пришлось звонить в автосервисe
(LOC)”.

* “My car broke down and I had to call (while
being) in a car-service station”.

Preposition “в” (“in”) governs two cases—
Nominative and Locative—but the second sen-
tence does not make sense pragmatically. We have
begun a more detailed annotation of all learner an-
swers (i.e., the types of grammatical errors). This
topic is beyond the scope of this paper.
• Broken: discarded instances (technical prob-
lems, words not in our training vocabulary, too
many numbers, punctuation marks, answers given
in languages different from expected, etc).

Table 1 represents the number of all mentioned
data types in the real learners’ answers (the second
column) and in the subset of these real answers

which were given only by advanced learners (the
third column).

We separate the real, manually annotated data
into four test sets (see Table 2).

A. The first test set contains only sentences ex-
hibiting MA.

B. The second test set is randomly chosen cor-
rect sentences from a separate corpus (for a total of
500 instances) which was not used for generating
training data.

C. The third test set is made to test the ability
of our model to distinguish between grammatical
and ungrammatical sentences (as it was trained to
do)—thus it contains:

C1. sentences with grammatical errors made by
Revita users;

C2. correct sentences from Revita’s database.
D. The fourth test set contains sentences only

with pragmatic errors.
In the next section, we shortly review prior work

related to artificial error generation (AEG) for the
grammaticality judgement task.

4 Related Work

Felice (2016) divides methods of AEG into deter-
ministic vs. probabilistic. The deterministic ap-
proach consists of methods that generate errors in
systematic ways, which do not make use of learner
error distributions. Izumi et al. (2003) introduced
a system for correction of article errors made by
English learners, native in Japanese. The system
was trained on artificial data where a, an, the or
the zero article were replaced with a different op-
tion chosen randomly.

Sjöbergh and Knutsson (2005) created an artifi-
cial corpus consisting of two of the most frequent
types of errors among non-native Swedish speak-



18

ers: split compounds and word order errors.
Brockett et al. (2006) describe a statistical ma-

chine translation (SMT) system for correcting a set
of 14 countable and uncountable nouns which are
often confused by learners of English. They used
rules to change quantifiers (e.g. much–many), to
generate plural forms, and to insert unnecessary
determiners. Lee and Seneff (2008) created an ar-
tificial corpus of verb form errors. They changed
verbs in the original text to different forms, such
as to-infinitive, 3rd person singular present, past,
or -ing participle. Ehsan and Faili (2013) used
SMT for AEG to correct grammatical errors and
context-sensitive spelling mistakes in English and
Farsi. Training corpora were obtained by inject-
ing artificial errors into well-formed treebank sen-
tences using predefined error templates.

Probabilistic approach: Rozovskaya and Roth
describe several methods for AEG which include
creation of article (Rozovskaya and Roth, 2010b)
and preposition errors (Rozovskaya and Roth,
2010a, 2011) based on statistics from an English
as a Second Language (ESL) corpora. They in-
ject errors into Wikipedia sentences using differ-
ent strategies (e.g., distribution before and after
correction, L1-specific error distributions).

Rozovskaya et al. (2012) proposed an inflation
method, which preserves the ability of the model
to take into account learner error patterns. While
also increasing the model’s recall, this method
reduced the confidence that the system has in
the source word. Improvement in F-scores was
achieved by this method when correcting deter-
miners and prepositions. Further, this method was
used by other researchers (Felice and Yuan, 2014;
Putra and Szabó, 2013; Rozovskaya et al., 2013,
2014, 2017).

Dickinson (2010) introduce an approach to gen-
erate artificial syntactic errors and morphologi-
cal errors for Russian. Imamura et al. (2012)
adapt the method of Rozovskaya and Roth (2010b)
for particle correction in Japanese. Cahill et al.
(2013) examine automatically-compiled sentences
from Wikipedia revisions for correcting errors in
prepositions. Kasewa et al. (2018) use an off-the-
shelf attentive sequence-to-sequence NN (Bah-
danau et al., 2014) to learn to introduce errors.

5 Model and Experiment

Data: For generating the training/validation
datasets, we use the open-source “Taiga” Russian

corpus,16 which is arranged by genre into sev-
eral segments. We used all news segments, and
part of the literary text segment, for a total of
809M words. We exclude social media, film subti-
tles, and poems, because their language has more
deviations from the literary standard. All docu-
ments were lowercased, tokenized, and morpho-
logically analyzed using Crosslator (Klyshinsky
et al., 2011).17 We replace all punctuation marks
with a special token, to preserve information about
sentence/clause boundaries. The size of the train-
ing vocabulary was around 1.2M words (after re-
moving words with frequency less than 2). For
validation, we randomly chose 5% of all generated
data.

Model architecture: our baseline neural net-
work (NN) is implemented in TensorFlow. Its ar-
chitecture is a one-layer bidirectional LSTM with
dropout (0.2), which has 512 hidden units. The
hidden state of the BiLSTM is then fed to an
Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP). The MLP uses one
hidden layer with 1024 neurons, and Leaky ReLU
activation function. The size of the output layer is
1, since we have only two classes to predict. The
output of the MLP is then fed to a sigmoid activa-
tion function to obtain a prediction for the entire
input sequence. To encode words, we use the Fast-
Text 300-dimensional pre-trained embeddings.18

The network and the word embeddings were
trained in an end-to-end fashion. Optimization
was done using Adam, dropout, and early stopping
based on the loss on the validation set. We trained
the network over only half of an epoch, since it
was showing signs of overfitting—because we use
a sliding window, the number of training instances
was over 90M. The averaged accuracy on the val-
idation set was 95 %. Table 2 reports the accuracy
on the test sets, averaged across 5 runs.

6 Results

Table 2 shows the results of our experiments in
terms of accuracy. 85.9% accuracy was achieved
across all types of MA. However, we should stress
that in the test set marked Multi-admissible (MA),
the majority of the instances belong to the MA
types of Present/Past tense and Singular/Plural.

Since the test set has a small number of in-
stances of MA contexts with gerund/other verb

16https://tatianashavrina.github.io
17This analyzer was chosen because it is a part of Revita’s

text processing pipeline.
18https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/crawl-vectors.html



19

Test set # Acc
A. Multi-admissible 178 85.9
B. Random correct 500 92.3
C. Correct & incorrect 1290 81.0
C1. Grammatically correct 650 73.3
C2. Grammatically incorrect 640 88.6
D. Pragmatic errors 46 54.3

Table 2: Percent accuracy of our NN model. Random
correct: test set built from sentences which were not in-
cluded in the training and validation sets and did not ap-
pear in Revita’s database, randomly selected sentences
from normal texts. Grammatically incorrect: test set
with real grammatical errors from students’ data. Prag-
matic errors: test set with real pragmatic errors from
students’ data.

MA types # Acc
1. Perf/Imperf + Gerund/Other 14 92.8
2. Case 24 91.7
3. Present/Past 53 88.7
4. Singular/Plural 78 82.0
5. Short/Full adj 9 77.7

Table 3: Percent accuracy of our NN model for dif-
ferent MA contexts. Case combines all types of MA
contexts listed in the Subsection 2.1 which differ by
case (Nominative/Instrumental, Genitive/Accusative
and others).

forms and MA contexts which differ by perfec-
tive/imperfective aspect, we grouped them to-
gether for testing the model. On these two types
of MA the model achieved the highest accu-
racy, 92.8% (see Table 3). For the same rea-
sons we grouped together MA contexts which
differ by case (Nominative/Instrumental, Geni-
tive/Accusative, Second Genitive and other). The
overall accuracy for these contexts is 91.7%.

We plan to test all combined MA types sepa-
rately as soon as we have more annotated data.
The accuracy for Present/Past tense is 88.7%.
The accuracy for Number agreement (including
subject-verb agreement on number) is 81.0%.
The lowest accuracy was achieved for Short/Full
adjectives—77.7%. Some discussion of errors is
in the following subsection.

We use additional test sets to assess other as-
pects of the trained NN model. The “Random cor-
rect” test set (B.) contains 500 randomly sampled
sentences without errors, to compare with the MA
test set. These sentences were sampled from a
corpus which was not used for generating train-

ing/validation data, and are not present in the Re-
vita database. On random correct sentences, the
model achieved substantially better results than for
MA instances (92.3%). It is interesting that the
model has more difficulty with the syntactic struc-
ture of contexts with known MA than with some
random correct contexts.

Another test set (C.) is made up of correct sen-
tences from the Revita database, and sentences
with grammatical errors made by the learners. We
evaluate the model on this test set to gain insight
into how well it can differentiate between various
incorrect vs. correct sentences. The discussion of
results for different grammatical error types is be-
yond the scope of this paper, and is left for the
further work.

The pragmatic error test set (D.) was used to
find out how difficult it is to predict labels for
sentences which are correct grammatically but in-
correct semantically/pragmatically. Clearly these
instances pose the greatest challenge to the cur-
rent model; (it was not explicitly trained to detect
them).

Of the nearly 3000 manually annotated in-
stances, the number of instances found to be prag-
matic errors and MA was not large.

6.1 Error Analysis

We analysed some of the errors the model made on
the MA test dataset. For all types of MA, we found
some similar patterns: the model assigns very low
scores to short sequences (which are padded), con-
texts with too many punctuation marks or names,
and context with non-Russian words which are un-
known to the model. For example, for construc-
tions with Present/Past tense, the network made
wrong predictions if the subject was a name or a
number, which in most cases corresponds to the
token “UNK” in our model’s vocabulary. The
same happens if the subject is outside the window.
Sometimes the model confuses certain nouns or
pronouns next to the verb with its subject, for ex-
ample:

“Поезда (SUBJ) метро задерживаются
(PRED).
“Trains of the metro are delayed.”

In this case, the model might suppose that
the (genitive) singular noun “метро” (“metro”) is
the subject of the plural verb “задерживаются”
(“are delayed”), which is incorrect—the actual



20

subject is the plural noun “поезда” (“trains”)—
but the genitive is closer to the predicate. As a re-
sult, the model will identify the sentence as gram-
matically incorrect, believing that the subject and
predicate conflict in number.

We also should note that some instances marked
by the model as incorrect are actually incorrect,
but marked as MA by annotators, which means
that MA instances need to be double-checked and
that the model is able to identify ungrammatical
contexts.

It is difficult to compare our results directly
with prior work, because we have not yet found
in the previous work a problem similar to Multiple
Admissibility for Russian. A similar problem—
grammatical acceptability judgment—is presented
in (Warstadt et al., 2018), for English only. The
best results they achieved in terms of percent ac-
curacy is 77.2%. The average human accuracy is
85%.

For the task of grammatical error detection, the
results obtained for Russian are much lower than
for English. For example, the highest precision in
(Rozovskaya and Roth, 2019) for errors in number
agreement is 56.7.

Concerning the grammaticality judgement task,
Marvin (2018) reported accuracies for subject-
verb agreement from 50% to 99% depending on
the syntactic complexity of the sentence (e.g., re-
lations across relative clause). This is similar to
Present/Past tense construction in our setup.

Linzen et al. (2016) also concludes that the
grammaticality judgment objective is more diffi-
cult than, for example, the number prediction ob-
jective. The LSTM model can have up to 23%
error on this task, as sentence complexity grows.
This work studied only number agreement and
subject-verb dependencies in English.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

We address the problem of Multiple admissibility
in automatically generated exercises, by approach-
ing it as a grammaticality judgment task. We of-
fer a detailed study of examples, where our lan-
guage learning system mistakenly assesses admis-
sible answers as incorrect. We classify these con-
texts into 10 types, where only some of these types
have been in the focus of prior research, especially
for Russian. We train a NN model with the gram-
maticality objective, independent of the type of
test set we use for evaluation. The problem of

lacking labeled training data was approached by
generating a dataset with artificial errors. We also
observed that the MA problem is more relevant
for advanced language learners. Another observa-
tion is that for a trained model it is more difficult
to make prediction about MA contexts than about
random correct sentences.

We plan to extend and improve our training data
by marking numbers with special tokens, or by
mapping them into words. We also plan to mark
names with a name tag by using some of the exist-
ing NER models, and mark rare words with their
part of speech. We also believe that providing
the model with syntactic information (parsing) can
help, so that we can train a model in a multitask
fashion: predict tags of words, as well as their cor-
rectness. Also, it is worth trying to use new large-
scale language models, which proved to be more
effective on a variety of tasks.

Additional annotation of student data collected
in Revita’s database is needed; in the current work,
the annotation was done by two experts, and all
disagreements were resolved. We plan to ex-
tend our experiments to other languages available
in Revita. Each has its own language-specific
types of MA. Generating all paradigms of a word
could be problematic for some highly inflected
languages (e.g., Finnish, etc.).

The goal of this paper is to introduce the prob-
lem of Multiple Admissibility and to attract more
attention to experimenting with morphologically
rich languages and languages other than English
in this context.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473.

Chris Brockett, William B Dolan, and Michael Gamon.
2006. Correcting ESL errors using phrasal SMT
techniques. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and the
44th annual meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 249–256. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Aoife Cahill, Nitin Madnani, Joel Tetreault, and Diane
Napolitano. 2013. Robust systems for preposition
error correction using Wikipedia revisions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
507–517.



21

Markus Dickinson. 2010. Generating learner-like mor-
phological errors in russian. In Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 259–267.

Nava Ehsan and Heshaam Faili. 2013. Grammatical
and context-sensitive error correction using a sta-
tistical machine translation framework. Software:
Practice and Experience, 43(2):187–206.

Mariano Felice. 2016. Artificial error generation
for translation-based grammatical error correction.
Technical report, University of Cambridge, Com-
puter Laboratory.

Mariano Felice and Zheng Yuan. 2014. Generating ar-
tificial errors for grammatical error correction. In
Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at
the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
116–126.

Sylviane Granger. 2003. Error-tagged learner corpora
and CALL: A promising synergy. CALICO journal,
20(3):465–480.

Kristina Gulordava, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave,
Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2018. Color-
less green recurrent networks dream hierarchically.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11138.

Kenji Imamura, Kuniko Saito, Kugatsu Sadamitsu, and
Hitoshi Nishikawa. 2012. Grammar error correc-
tion using pseudo-error sentences and domain adap-
tation. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Short Papers-Volume 2, pages 388–392. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Emi Izumi, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Toyomi Saiga, Thep-
chai Supnithi, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2003. Automatic
error detection in the Japanese learners’ English spo-
ken data. In The Companion Volume to the Proceed-
ings of 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Rafal Jozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam
Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu. 2016. Exploring
the limits of language modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.02410.

Sudhanshu Kasewa, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian
Riedel. 2018. Wronging a right: Generating better
errors to improve grammatical error detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.00668.

Anisia Katinskaia, Javad Nouri, and Roman Yangarber.
2018. Revita: a language-learning platform at the
intersection of ITS and CALL. In Proceedings of
LREC: 11th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Miyazaki, Japan.

E.S. Klyshinsky, N.A. Kochetkova, M.I. Litvinov,
and V.Yu. Maximov. 2011. Method of POS-
disambiguation using information about words co-
occurrence (for Russian). Proceedings of GSCL,
pages 191–195.

Mikhail Korobov. 2015. Morphological analyzer and
generator for Russian and Ukrainian languages. In
International Conference on Analysis of Images, So-
cial Networks and Texts, pages 320–332. Springer.

John Lee and Stephanie Seneff. 2008. Correcting mis-
use of verb forms. Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT,
pages 174–182.

Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg.
2016. Assessing the ability of lstms to learn syntax-
sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 4:521–535.

Rebecca Marvin and Tal Linzen. 2018. Targeted syn-
tactic evaluation of language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.09031.

Desmond Darma Putra and Lili Szabó. 2013. UdS at
CoNLL 2013 Shared Task. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 88–95.

E.V. Rakhilina, A.S. Vyrenkova, and M.S. Polinskaya.
2014. Grammar of errors and grammar of construc-
tions: ”Heritage” (”inherited”) Russian language.
Questions of linguistics, 3(2014):3–19.

Ditmar Elyashevich Rosenthal, E.V. Dzhandzhakova,
and N.P. Kabanova. 1994. Reference on Spelling,
Pronunciation, and Literary Editing. Moscow Inter-
national School of Translators.

Alla Rozovskaya, Kai-Wei Chang, Mark Sammons,
and Dan Roth. 2013. The University of Illinois
system in the CoNLL-2013 shared task. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Compu-
tational Natural Language Learning: Shared Task,
pages 13–19.

Alla Rozovskaya, Kai-Wei Chang, Mark Sammons,
Dan Roth, and Nizar Habash. 2014. The Illinois-
Columbia system in the CoNLL-2014 shared task.
In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared
Task, pages 34–42.

Alla Rozovskaya and Dan Roth. 2010a. Generating
confusion sets for context-sensitive error correction.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
961–970. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Alla Rozovskaya and Dan Roth. 2010b. Training
paradigms for correcting errors in grammar and us-
age. In Human language technologies: The 2010
annual conference of the north american chapter of
the association for computational linguistics, pages
154–162. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Alla Rozovskaya and Dan Roth. 2011. Algorithm
selection and model adaptation for ESL correction
tasks. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of



22

the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies-Volume 1, pages 924–
933. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Alla Rozovskaya and Dan Roth. 2019. Grammar error
correction in morphologically rich languages: The
case of Russian. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 7:1–17.

Alla Rozovskaya, Dan Roth, and Mark Sammons.
2017. Adapting to learner errors with minimal su-
pervision. Computational Linguistics, 43(4):723–
760.

Alla Rozovskaya, Mark Sammons, and Dan Roth.
2012. The UI system in the HOO 2012 shared task
on error correction. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Workshop on Building Educational Applications Us-
ing NLP, pages 272–280. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Jonas Sjöbergh and Ola Knutsson. 2005. Faking er-
rors to avoid making errors: Very weakly super-
vised learning for error detection in writing. In Proc.
RANLP, volume 2005.

Viktor Vladimirovich Vinogradov. 1972. Russian lan-
guage: The grammatical doctrine of the word, vol-
ume 21. High School.

Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2018. Neural network acceptability judg-
ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12471.


