




































Speech technology and Argentinean Welsh

Elise Bell
The University of Texas at El Paso

eabell2@utep.edu

Abstract

This paper argues for increased efforts to
source Welsh language data from the pop-
ulation of Welsh speakers in Argentina.
The dialect of Argentinean Welsh is under-
resourced even in comparison to other
Celtic languages, which are already con-
sidered less-resourced languages (LRLs).
Argentinean Welsh has been shown to
diverge from other dialects of Welsh
in the realization of acoustic contrasts
such as voice-onset time and vowel dura-
tion. These differences potentially obscure
phonemic contrasts in the language, cre-
ating homophony absent in other dialects.
The inclusion of Argentinean Welsh data
in training sets for future Welsh speech
technology development will increase the
applicability of such technology to other
speaker communities whose Welsh speech
may not align with that currently in use for
model training, including second-language
and non-fluent speakers.

1 Introduction

The development of speech language technology
such as automatic speech recognition (ASR) de-
pends on the availability and accessibility of large-
scale language data sets, both spoken and written.
The information in these data sets is used to create
statistical generalizations that form the basis for
speech technologies including speech recognition,
text-to-speech systems, and grammatical parsing.
Large resources of this type are less available for

c© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

under-resourced languages, including Welsh and
other Celtic languages, making creation of speech
technologies for these languages more challeng-
ing. As we undertake that challenge, it is vital that
we consider the source of the data on which our
technology is based. As less-resourced language
speech technology becomes more broadly accessi-
ble, speakers who deviate from the norms explic-
itly or implicitly assumed by the technology will
begin to come in contact with it. Depending on
the variety inherent in the data underlying the sys-
tem, those marginalized speakers may or may not
be able to successfully take advantage of speech
technology. The aim of this paper is to highlight
the particular areas of speech technology develop-
ment that may create obstacles or pose problems
for users, and to propose the addition of a partic-
ular source of acoustic data that lies outside the
norm for Welsh language technology. The main
speaker group of concern here is speakers of Welsh
in Argentina, but the arguments that follow apply
to second language (L2) or non-fluent speakers of
Welsh as well.

Compared to dialects of Welsh spoken in Wales,
Argentinean (or Patagonian) Welsh is extremely
under-resourced and under-researched. Documen-
tation efforts amount to a handful of citations
(Jones, 1984; Jones, 1998; Sleeper, 2015; Bell,
2017), and to my knowledge, only one speech cor-
pus. Little is known about how the dialect of Welsh
spoken in Argentina differs from other dialects of
Welsh, although there are several reasons to expect
dialectal variation. The effects of bilingualism on
speech production are well documented (Flege et
al., 1997; Flege et al., 2003; Escudero, 2009), and
all adult speakers of Argentinean Welsh are bilin-
gual with Spanish (if not trilingual with English or
another language). Dialect differences may also

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 16



arise from the effects of second language (L2) ac-
quisition of Welsh. Differences in speech produc-
tion due to these effects may include the merg-
ing of phonemic categories, or the use of differ-
ent acoustic cues in contrast production. Because
these effects are fairly inextricably tied up with
the effect of Spanish bilingualism on Argentinean
Welsh in general, they will not be treated sepa-
rately here. This paper presents a brief overview
of the state of Welsh language speech technology
and resources, followed by a short discussion of
the history and modern context of the Welsh lan-
guage in Argentina. Subsequently, I present evi-
dence that experimentally observed differences be-
tween Welsh dialects support the inclusion of Ar-
gentinean Welsh data in future speech technology
development efforts.

1.1 Welsh speech technology

Speech recognition and speech synthesis technolo-
gies rely on (relatively) large amounts of acoustic
data, which must be transcribed orthographically
(in the case of a grapheme-based speech recog-
nition system) or phonetically (in the case of a
phoneme-based system). The collection, analy-
sis, and processing of this data requires resources
including people-hours, funding, and often, par-
ticipation of community members in data crowd-
sourcing efforts (Prys and Jones, 2018). Currently,
available Welsh speech technology is fairly lim-
ited (compared to larger-resourced languages like
English). Much of what is available has been
produced by the Welsh Language Technologies
Unit, based at Bangor University.1 Tools pro-
duced by the Language Technologies Unit range
from front-end resources accessible to the public
(a vocabulary website plugin (Jones et al., 2016),
a Welsh language spelling and grammar checker
(Prys et al., 2016)) to back-end tools such as a
part-of-speech tagger (Prys and Jones, 2015) that
are open source and accessible to researchers out-
side of the unit itself. The unit has also devel-
oped speech recognition and synthetic speech tech-
nologies that are of particular relevance to this pa-
per. These include the development of Macsen,2 a
Welsh-language personal digital assistant based on
data collected by the Languages Technologies Unit

1www.bangor.ac.uk/canolfanbedwyr/
technolegau_iaith.php.en
2http://techiaith.cymru/2016/05/
introducing-macsen

using the Paldaruo app3 and website to crowd-
source the collection of Welsh utterances (Prys
and Jones, 2018). Utterances were elicited with a
set of target words and sentences designed to col-
lect a representative phoneme set. The project is
currently available through the Mozilla Common-
Voice project4 where users can contribute and eval-
uate recordings, and where a portion of the vetted
data is available for download.

There are several other text and speech corpora
available for the Welsh language. The Language
Technologies Unit has created multiple text cor-
pora, including one of social media posts5 as well
as a million-word corpus consisting of various reg-
isters of Welsh writing.6 Researchers at Bangor
University’s ESRC Centre for Research on Bilin-
gualism in Theory & Practice have also produced
two publicly available corpora of Welsh bilingual
speech.7 One of these, the Patagonia corpus, is
to my knowledge the only publicly available col-
lection of Argentinean Welsh speech. While such
conversational corpora are invaluable for the study
of syntactic and morphological phenomena (Carter
et al., 2010; Webb-Davies, 2016), the acoustic data
they contain is not always of high enough quality,
nor is the corpus large enough, to stand alone as the
sole source for development of speech technology.
A brief history of Welsh in Argentina is presented
below, followed by a discussion of the benefits that
Argentinean Welsh data may have on future devel-
opment of Welsh speech technology.

1.2 Argentinean Welsh
The presence of Welsh in Argentina is due to
the mid-19th century efforts of a group of Welsh
speakers, led by Michael D. Jones, who sought to
establish a Welsh colony away from the influence
of the English language and British government
(Williams, 1975). In 1865, following an agree-
ment with the government of Argentina, a Welsh
colony was established in the Patagonia region of
of the country. Today, descendants of the origi-
nal 200 colonists (and of the several thousand who
followed in subsequent years) still maintain the
Welsh language and culture in Argentina. Mod-
ern Welsh speakers are clustered in two areas of
3https://apps.apple.com/bs/app/paldaruo/
id840185808
4https://voice.mozilla.org
5http://techiaith.cymru/data/corpora/
twitter
6http://corpws.cymru/ceg/
7http://bangortalk.org.uk/

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 17



Chubut Province, in Dyffryn Camwy on the At-
lantic coast, and Cwm Hyfryd to the west.

Although inter-generational transmission of the
language waned during the 20th century, revital-
ization efforts were spurred in 1965, the centennial
of the original colony’s establishment. The cen-
tennial celebration renewed interest in Welsh cul-
ture and language, and by the 1990s several lan-
guage initiatives were established which still ex-
ist today. These include Welsh language medium
primary schools, annual Eisteddfodau (traditional
poetry and song competitions), and an ongoing
teacher exchange program with Wales through the
Welsh Language Project.8

2 Discussion

Argentinean Welsh is spoken by a population that
is separated from Wales by more than a century
of sparse contact as well as a language barrier
(bilingualism with Spanish, rather than English).
These factors have almost certainly contributed to
linguistic divergence in many aspects of Argen-
tinean Welsh. The most salient of these aspects for
the purpose of this paper is divergence in the lan-
guage’s sound system, in the acoustic realization
and phonological representation of speech sounds.
Previous research on speech recognition of dialect
and accent differences has shown that, given a
large enough data set, systems trained on multi-
ple dialects perform better than those trained on
a single dialect (Rao and Sak, 2017; Li et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2018). Other work has found
that including accent classification when train-
ing a multi-accent speech recognition system im-
proved later classification of both accent-classified
and accent-unclassified datasets (Jain et al., 2018).
Before addressing specific evidence for phonetic
and phonological differences between Argentinean
Welsh and other dialects of Welsh, the next sec-
tion discusses the reasoning for including dialectal
variation in speech technology models.

The results of previous research indicate that the
inclusion of dialectal acoustic variation can pro-
vide a more variable and more useful data set for
the future development of Welsh language technol-
ogy. I propose that Argentinean Welsh provides a
unique opportunity to broaden the language data
base from which Welsh speech technologies are

8https://wales.britishcouncil.org/en/
programmes/education/welsh-language-
project

developed. Specific aspects of Argentinean Welsh
variation, which may be due to synchronic effects
from first language Spanish, the effect of lifelong
Spanish bilingualism, or diachronic dialect diver-
gence, are discussed below.

Today, all adult speakers of Welsh are at least
bilingual, either with English (in Wales) or with
Spanish (in Argentina). This situation compli-
cates what might otherwise be a straightforward
dialect comparison between differing varieties of
Welsh. Cross-linguistic influence from competing
languages Spanish and English is entangled with
other linguistic pressures, including effects of first
language (L1) on second language (L2) speech,
and historical language change as a result of con-
tact. Teasing apart these intertwined factors is far
beyond the scope of this paper, and it is sufficient
for our purposes to acknowledge that multiple fac-
tors exist, and that they likely influence the Welsh
language in both regions. Recent work has used
experimental methods and corpus analyses to in-
vestigate the realization of sound contrasts in Ar-
gentinean Welsh that are hypothesized to be sus-
ceptible to influence from Spanish contact.

Sleeper (2015) investigated the realization of
voice onset time (VOT) in the Welsh voiceless
stop series /p t k/. It was hypothesized that while
contact with the English system reinforces the re-
tention of the Welsh voiceless aspirated-voiceless
unaspirated VOT contrast, contact with Spanish in
Argentina may have resulted in a shift to a more
Spanish-like voiced-voiceless unaspirated system.
Sleeper extracted VOT values from word-initial
instances of /p t k/ produced in conversational
speech by Welsh bilinguals in Argentina and in
Wales, recorded in the Patagonia and Siarad cor-
pora (Deuchar et al., 2014). Results confirmed
his hypothesis, with Argentinean Welsh-Spanish
bilingual speakers producing shorter Spanish-like
VOT in voiceless-stop initial Welsh words, com-
pared to the English-like VOT produced by the
Welsh-English bilingual group.

Bell (2018) collected productions of Welsh vow-
els from Welsh-Spanish bilinguals in Argentina
and Welsh-English bilinguals in Wales in order to
investigate differences in the acoustic realization
of allophonic and phonemic vowel length. Be-
cause Spanish does not contrast vowels on the ba-
sis of length, nor does duration vary allophonically
to the extent that it does in Welsh or English, it was
hypothesized that Welsh-Spanish bilinguals were

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 18



likely to exhibit differences in their production of
long and short Welsh vowels. Results showed
that Welsh-Spanish bilinguals produced phonemic
vowel length contrasts in much the same way as
Welsh-English bilinguals (relying on both vowel
duration and spectral quality), but were less simi-
lar in production of allophonic duration differences
conditioned by following consonant voicing.

Differences in the acoustic realization of the fac-
tors mentioned above are likely to prove challeng-
ing for an automatic speech recognition system
trained only on Welsh produced by fluent speak-
ers in Wales. The differences observed in Argen-
tinean Welsh generally appear to reduce acoustic
contrast between Welsh phonemes (the voiceless
/p t k/ and voiced /b d g/ stop series, or the vowel
length contrast separating minimal pairs such as
/mor/ mor ‘so’ and /mo:r/ môr ‘sea’). The collapse
of contrasting acoustic cues to these (and poten-
tially other) phonemic differences in Argentinean
Welsh is likely to prove challenging for an auto-
matic speech recognition system trained on other
dialects of the language.

One solution to this problem, as often seems
to be the case in the domain of speech tech-
nology, is more data. Natural and lab-produced
speech datasets collected from speakers of Ar-
gentinean Welsh will serve to diversify the infor-
mation set from which statistical generalizations
about acoustic-phonetic realizations of Welsh are
drawn. Knowledge-based approaches to speech
recognition that incorporate linguistic generaliza-
tions such as phonological rules into the system
should also be considered, as they may be well-
suited to ASR development from small datasets
(Besacier et al., 2006; Gaikwad et al., 2010).

3 Suggestions for future work

While advocating for the inclusion of Argentinean
Welsh data in future Welsh speech technology
projects is well and good, it must also be acknowl-
edged that there are challenges to doing so. The
Welsh-speaking population of Argentina is sparse
compared to that of Wales, with speaker numbers
in the low thousands, spread throughout the re-
gion (Ó Néill, 2005). This problem may be over-
come by making use of existing community net-
works and organizations. Data collection, partic-
ipant recruitment, and outreach could all poten-
tially be integrated with community events such
as the annual Eisteddfod in both the eastern and

western Argentinean Welsh communities. Addi-
tionally, the Welsh Language Project and Menter
Patagonia program involve networks of Welsh lan-
guage educators in the region who may be inter-
ested in integrating speech technology participa-
tion into their classrooms of speakers at all levels.

As the resources for Welsh speech technology
continue to grow, the opportunity to include data
from speakers of Welsh in Argentina increases.
Through projects like the speech-collecting Pal-
daruo app and Mozilla CommonVoice (Prys and
Jones, 2018), it is increasingly possible to target
and recruit participants who are speakers of Ar-
gentinean Welsh (and of course, other minority
dialects of the language) through crowdsourcing
methods. Encouraging participation in the Com-
monVoice initiative, which is online and requires
little time commitment is a simple first step toward
crowdsourcing Argentinean Welsh data.

4 Conclusion

This paper has argued that the dialect of Welsh
spoken in Argentina presents a valuable resource
for the continuing development of Welsh speech
technology. Technologies such as speech recogni-
tion benefit from the inclusion of variation (both
individual and dialectal) in the data from which
they are developed. I have shown that the dialect of
Argentinean Welsh is different from other dialects
of Welsh in the way speakers acoustically realize
underlying phonemic contrasts. This variation, if
included in speech technology training data, will
serve to develop technologies that will be accessi-
ble to more speakers, including those who are less
fluent, or who due to language background and L2
cross-linguistic influence are not able to fully take
advantage of current Welsh speech technology.

Furthermore, inclusion of the Argentinean
Welsh community in the development of Welsh
speech technology will strengthen ties between
speakers in Wales and Argentina. The goals of
Welsh language revitalization programs in both
countries include supporting new speakers of the
language, and making speech technology acces-
sible and responsive to those new speakers will
further progress toward that goal. The Welsh-
speaking population of Argentina is a valuable re-
source, and outreach and integration efforts to and
with community members can only stand to bene-
fit future efforts in the development of speech tech-
nology for all Welsh speakers.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 19



References

Bell, Elise Adrienne. 2017. Perception of Welsh vowel
contrasts by Welsh-Spanish bilinguals in Argentina.
In Linguistic Society of America Annual Meeting.
Linguistic Society of America Annual Meeting.

Bell, Elise Adrienne. 2018. Perception and Production
of Welsh Vowels by Welsh-Spanish Bilinguals. Ph.D.
thesis, The University of Arizona.

Besacier, Laurent, V-B Le, Christian Boitet, and Vin-
cent Berment. 2006. ASR and translation for under-
resourced languages. In 2006 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Process-
ing Proceedings, volume 5, pages V–V. IEEE.

Carter, Diana, Peredur Davies, M. Carmen Parafita
Couto, and Margaret Deuchar. 2010. A corpus-
based analysis of codeswitching patterns in bilingual
communities. In Proceedings: XXIX Simposio In-
ternacional de la Sociedad Española de Lingüı́stica,
volume 1.

Deuchar, Margaret P., Peredur Davies, Jon Russell Her-
ring, M. Carmen Parafita Couto, and D Carter. 2014.
Building bilingual corpora. In Thomas, E M and
I Mennen, editors, Advances in the Study of Bilin-
gualism. Multilingual Matters, Bristol.

Escudero, P. 2009. Linguistic perception of ‘similar’
L2 sounds. In Boersma, Paul and S. Hamann, edi-
tors, Phonology in perception, pages 151–190. Mou-
ton de Gruyter, Berlin.

Flege, James E., Ocke-Schwen Bohn, and Sunyoung
Jang. 1997. Effects of experience on non-native
speakers’ production and perception of English vow-
els. Journal of Phonetics, 25:437–470.

Flege, James E., Carlo Schirru, and Ian R.A. MacKay.
2003. Interaction between the native and second
language phonetic subsystems. Speech Communica-
tion, 40:467–491.

Gaikwad, Santosh K, Bharti W Gawali, and Pravin Yan-
nawar. 2010. A review on speech recognition tech-
nique. International Journal of Computer Applica-
tions, 10(3):16–24.

Jain, Abhinav, Minali Upreti, and Preethi Jyothi. 2018.
Improved accented speech recognition using accent
embeddings and multitask learning. In Proc. INTER-
SPEECH. ISCA.

Jones, Dewi Bryn, Gruffudd Prys, and Delyth Prys.
2016. Vocab: a dictionary plugin for web sites.
PARIS Inalco du 4 au 8 juillet 2016, page 93.

Jones, Robert Owen. 1984. Change and variation in
the Welsh of Gaiman, Chubut. In Ball, Martin J. and
Glyn E. Jones, editors, Welsh phonology, pages 237–
261. University of Wales Press, Cardiff.

Jones, Robert Owen. 1998. The Welsh language in
Patagonia. In Jenkins, Geraint H., editor, A social
history of the Welsh language: Language and com-
munity in the nineteenth century, pages 287–316.
University of Wales Press, Cardiff.

Li, Bo, Tara N Sainath, Khe Chai Sim, Michiel Bac-
chiani, Eugene Weinstein, Patrick Nguyen, Zhifeng
Chen, Yanghui Wu, and Kanishka Rao. 2018. Multi-
dialect speech recognition with a single sequence-to-
sequence model. In 2018 IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 4749–4753. IEEE.

Ó Néill, Diarmui. 2005. Rebuilding the Celtic lan-
guages: reversing language shift in the Celtic coun-
tries. Y Lolfa.

Prys, Delyth and Dewi Bryn Jones. 2015. National lan-
guage technologies portals for lrls: A case study. In
Language and Technology Conference, pages 420–
429. Springer.

Prys, Delyth and Dewi Bryn Jones. 2018. Gathering
data for speech technology in the welsh language: A
case study. Sustaining Knowledge Diversity in the
Digital Age, page 56.

Prys, Delyth, Gruffudd Prys, and Dewi Bryn Jones.
2016. Cysill ar-lein: A corpus of written contem-
porary welsh compiled from an on-line spelling and
grammar checker. In LREC.

Rao, Kanishka and Haşim Sak. 2017. Multi-accent
speech recognition with hierarchical grapheme based
models. In 2017 IEEE international conference on
acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP),
pages 4815–4819. IEEE.

Sleeper, Morgan. 2015. Contact effects on voice-onset
time (vot) in patagonian welsh. Journal of the Inter-
national Phonetic Association, pages 1–15.

Webb-Davies, Peredur. 2016. Does the old language
endure? Age variation and change in contemporary
Welsh grammar. In Welsh Linguistics Seminar.

Williams, Glyn. 1975. The desert and the dream: A
study of Welsh colonization in Chubut 1865 – 1915.
University of Wales Press, Cardiff.

Yang, Xuesong, Kartik Audhkhasi, Andrew Rosenberg,
Samuel Thomas, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, and Mark
Hasegawa-Johnson. 2018. Joint modeling of ac-
cents and acoustics for multi-accent speech recog-
nition. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
pages 1–5. IEEE.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 20


