




































 

Improving full-text search results on ​dúchas.ie​ using language 
technology 

Brian Ó Raghallaigh 
Fiontar & Scoil na Gaeilge 

Dublin City University 
Drumcondra, Dublin 9 

Ireland 
brian.oraghallaigh@dcu.ie 

Kevin Scannell 
Department of Computer Science 

Saint Louis University 
220 N. Grand Blvd. 

Saint Louis, Missouri 63103-2007 
kscanne@gmail.com 

 

Meghan Dowling 
ADAPT Centre 

Dublin City University 
Glasnevin, Dublin 9 

Ireland 
meghan.dowling@adaptcentre.ie 

  

 
Abstract 1

In this paper, we measure the      
effectiveness of using language    
standardisation, lemmatisation, and   
machine translation to improve full-text     
search results on ​dúchas.ie​, the web      
interface to the Irish National Folklore      
Collection. Our focus is the Schools’      
Collection, a scanned manuscript    
collection which is being transcribed by      
members of the public via a      
crowdsourcing initiative. We show that     
by applying these technologies to the      
manuscript page transcriptions, we obtain     
substantial improvements in search    
engine recall over a test set of actual user         
queries, with no appreciable drop in      
precision. Our results motivate the     
inclusion of this language technology in      
the search infrastructure of this folklore      
resource. 

1 Background 

This research is motivated by an objective to        
improve access to the Irish ​National Folklore       

1 ​© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a 
Creative Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, 
attribution, CCBY-ND. 

Collection​, one of the largest collections of       
folklore in Europe, and a collection that contains        
material in both official languages of Ireland,       
Irish and English. Our proposition is that the        
full-text search facility available on the      
collection’s website, ​dúchas.ie​, can be enhanced      2
by introducing language technology options. By      
demonstrating that language standardisation,    
demutation, lemmatisation, and machine    
translation technologies can improve information     
retrieval on the website, this paper supports this        
proposition and motivates the inclusion of these       
technologies in the search infrastructure. 

1.1 The National Folklore Collection 

The Irish ​National Folklore Collection (NFC) is       
a large archive of folkloristic material collected       
in Ireland mostly during the 20th century, to        
which material is still being added. Part of the         
collection was inscribed into the UNESCO      
Memory of the World Register in September       
2017. The NFC, which is located in University        3
College Dublin (UCD), aims to collect, preserve       
and disseminate the oral tradition of Ireland.  4

In 2012, the ​Dúchas project was established to        
digitise the collections of the NFC and publish        
them online. This project is a partnership       

2 ​https://www.duchas.ie/en/ 
3 ​https://en.unesco.org/programme/mow/register 
4 ​http://www.ucd.ie/irishfolklore/en/ 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 63



between Dublin City University (DCU) and      
UCD (Ó Cleircín et al., 2014). The first major         
NFC collection digitised under the Dúchas      
project was the ​Schools’ Collection​. The      
Schools’ Collection is a large collection of       
folklore stories collected from school children      
throughout Ireland between 1937 and 1939, as       
part of a state-sponsored scheme (Ó Catháin,       
1988). The collection comprises approximately     
740,000 manuscript pages. 

Approximately 440,000 pages of the collection      
were digitised, manually indexed, and made      
available online on ​dúchas.ie between 2013–16.      
About 79% of the stories on these pages are in          
English (348,822 stories) and about 21% are in        
Irish (95,511 stories). These stories are enriched       
with various browsable metadata, e.g.     
title/excerpt, collector, informant, location,    
language. 

Stories in the collection are also indexed by        
topic. The first part of this work was done during          
the initial field work. The ​Irish Folklore       
Commission prepared a guide for teachers      
participating in the scheme, and this guide was        
published as a handbook entitled ​Irish Folklore       
and Tradition (Irish Folklore Commission,     
1937). This handbook contained 55 topic      
headings (e.g. ​a collection of riddles​, ​local cures​,        
the potato-crop​, ​festival customs​), and teachers      
were instructed to collect material under these       
headings. Following the initial field work,      
researchers in the Irish Folklore Commission      
produced a topic-based index of the stories       
collected as part of the scheme. This paper-based        
index was based primarily on the 55 general        
topics from the handbook, but a large number of         
more specific topic headings (e.g. ​Fionn Mac       
Cumhaill​, ​1798​, ​warts​) were added, bringing the       
total number of topics up to ​c.​1,700. DCU        
digitised this index in 2014. 

In 2016, using the digitised index and the story         
titles/excerpts indexed under the Dúchas project,      
and guided by the ​MoTIF Pilot Thesaurus of        
Irish Folklore (Ryan, 2015) developed by the       
Digital Repository of Ireland and the National       
Library of Ireland, DCU produced a shorter list        
of 208 standardised topic headings (e.g. ​riddles​,       
folk medicine​, ​potatoes​, ​events​), and mapped      
them to the Schools’ Collection stories, resulting       
in a new index for the Schools’ Collection on         
dúchas.ie​. This index is a mixture of broad        

headings (e.g. ​supernatural and legendary     
beings​, ​events​, ​folk medicine​) and narrow      
headings (e.g. ​banshees​, ​Halloween​,    
whooping-cough​). 

In 2014, to facilitate full-text search of the        
collection, DCU initiated a project to      
crowdsource transcriptions of the Schools’     
Collection manuscript pages using a custom-built      
web-based application open to anyone     
(Bhreathnach et al., 2019). This project was       
conceived, in part, because of the problems       
associated with performing optical character     
recognition on the pages of the collection, which        
contain a mix of handwriting styles, a mix of         
scripts (i.e. Latin and Insular Celtic), and a mix         
of languages (i.e. Irish English and prestandard       
Irish). 

The project has been a strong success with        
uptake amongst members of the public, students       
and folklore scholars. The transcriptions are      
generally of good quality and usable, in       
particular the Irish ones. Light editing is       
sometimes carried out, but bad transcriptions are       
rejected. Currently 49% of the English pages       
(​c.​170,000) and 32% of the Irish pages       
(​c.​31,000) have been transcribed.  5

The ​dúchas.ie website handles around 35,000      
queries per month including around 16,000      
full-text searches of the Schools’ Collection      
transcriptions. All of these queries are logged in        
a database. 

1.2 Irish standardisation 

The orthography and grammar of the Irish       
language was standardised in the middle of the        
last century with the introduction of the       
Caighdeán Oifigiúil (‘Official Standard’), first     
published in 1958 and revised in 2012 and 2017.         
Today, the standard form of the language is        
taught in schools, is used in all modern Irish         
dictionaries (both print and online), and has been        
almost universally adopted by the Irish-speaking      
public when writing the language. The spelling       
simplifications introduced by the standard cause      
occasional problems for Irish language     
technology, such as pairs of words that were        
distinguished in older orthographies which     
collapse to the same spelling in the standard (e.g.         
fiadhach (‘hunting’) and ​fiach (‘a raven’ or ‘a        

5 ​https://www.duchas.ie/en/meitheal/ 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 64



debt’), both written ​fiach in the standard, or ​bádh         
(‘a bay’), ​báidh (‘sympathy, liking’), and      
bádhadh (‘drowning’), all three written simply      
bá ​in the standard). Nevertheless, the overall       
effect of increased consistency and predictability      
arising from near-universal adoption of the      
standard has been a tremendous positive for the        
development of Irish language technology. It      
does mean, however, that taggers, parsers, and       
other NLP (natural language processing) tools      
developed for processing the standard form of       
the language fail badly when applied to       
prestandard texts. In the context of the current        
paper, the disconnect between the prestandard      
and standard orthographies makes it extremely      
difficult for users raised on the standard language        
to search corpora of prestandard texts such as the         
Schools’ Collection. 

An Caighdeánaitheoir ​(‘The Standardiser’) is     
an open source software package for      
standardising Irish texts, first developed around      
2006, and detailed in (Scannell, 2014). The       
software treats standardisation as a machine      
translation (MT) problem between    
closely-related languages, employing a hybrid     
rule-based and statistical model trained on a large        
corpus of parallel prestandard and standardised      
texts (including, for example, many important      
novels and autobiographies first published in the       
1920’s and 1930’s and manually standardised for       
a modern readership in recent years). It also        
attempts to correct misspellings before carrying      
out standardisation. The standardiser has been      
deployed by two important lexicographical     
projects in Ireland, the New English-Irish      
Dictionary project, and the Royal Irish      6
Academy’s ​Foclóir Stairiúil na Gaeilge (Uí      
Dhonnchadha et al., 2014) to help both       
lexicographers and end-users search their corpora      
of prestandard texts more effectively. 

1.3 Machine translation for Irish 

While the 2012 META-NET study on Irish       
language technology resources (Judge et al.,      
2012) deemed Irish-language machine translation     
as being weak or not supported, in recent years         
we have witnessed some development in this       
field. Dowling et al. (2015) describe the       
development of MT for use within the translation        

6 ​https://www.focloir.ie/ 

workflow of an Irish government department,      
while Arcan et al. (2016) provide results of        
building a more general domain Irish MT       
system. Most recently, Dowling et al. (2018)       
compare the two main MT paradigms: statistical       
machine translation (SMT) and neural machine      
translation (NMT). Their results indicate that      
with a low-resourced language such as Irish,       
particularly when paired with a language that       
differs in terms of sentence structure and       
morphological richness, SMT may provide better      
results. 

Building on this knowledge, we choose to       
duplicate the SMT system described by Dowling       
et al. for use in our experiment here. We train a           
phrase-based SMT system using Moses (Koehn      
et al., 2007), incorporating hierarchical     
reordering tables (Galley and Manning, 2008) in       
an attempt to address the divergent sentence       
structures (verb-subject-object in Irish,    
subject-verb-object in English). Our translation     
model is trained using the same 108,796       
sentences of parallel data as in Dowling et al.         
(2018), coming from a variety of sources such as         
the Department of Culture, Heritage and the       
Gaeltacht, Conradh na Gaeilge and Citizens      
Information. We build a 6-gram, rather than the        
traditional 3-gram, language model using     
KenLM (Heafield, 2011) which also aims to       
reduce any negative impact of the divergent word        
orders. Our datasets are preprocessed –      
sentence-tokenised, removal of blank lines,     
tokenisation of punctuation and truecased –      
before being translated by the MT system. 

2 Methodology 

Our principal aim in this paper is to investigate         
the effectiveness of standardisation and machine      
translation on the performance of the full-text       
search engine on ​dúchas.ie. We therefore cast       
this as an Information Retrieval (IR) problem. To        
this end, we set up experiments which make use         
of actual search queries submitted by users of the         
website, and aim to measure precision and recall        
of the search engine under various experimental       
conditions. Lacking a gold-standard corpus of      
relevant/non-relevant documents with which to     
measure precision and recall, we instead make       
use of a subset of the 208 topic labels, described          
in Section 1.1, attached to the stories in the         

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 65



Schools’ Collection to create our own test       
corpus, as follows. 

First, we manually examined the top 10,000       
search queries submitted to ​dúchas.ie to date,       
keeping only the Irish language queries (just over        
1,500 of the 10,000). Each of these was then         
manually compared with the list of 208       
standardised topic headings, and we found 172       
queries which clearly corresponded to some topic       
on the list; for instance, the topic ​Christmas was         
matched to the five queries “An Nollaig”,       
“NOLLAIG”, “Nollag”, “nodlag”, and    
“nodlaig”. These 172 queries were matched to a        
total of 67 topics. We further restricted to those         
topics for which there were at least 100        
transcribed stories in both Irish and English,       
leaving just 20 topics (​Riddles​, ​Jokes​, ​Fairy       
forts​, ​The Great Famine​, ​Entertainments and      
recreational activities​, ​Folk medicine​, ​Folk     
poetry​, ​Food products​, ​Religious tales​, ​Clothing      
and accessories​, ​Fianna​, ​Feast of St Brigid​,       
May​, ​Halloween​, ​Christmas​, ​Prayers​, ​Proverbs​,     
Hardship​, ​Graveyards​, ​Potatoes​) and 72 of the       
original 172 queries. For each remaining topic,       
we randomly selected 100 Irish transcriptions      
and 100 English transcriptions from that topic in        
order to produce two test corpora of 2,000        
documents each for our IR experiments. Finally,       
the English transcriptions were machine     
translated into Irish using the system described in        
Section 1.3 to allow us to evaluate the        
effectiveness of Irish language search queries for       
retrieving relevant English language documents. 

The experiments differ only in the      
preprocessing that was applied to the documents       
in the test corpora before indexing and to the         
search queries before searching. The four      
experimental conditions are as follows: 
 

● Baseline​: For this experiment, all text      
was converted to lowercase, and Irish      
diacritics (á,é,í,ó,ú) are converted to     
ASCII (a,e,i,o,u). This setup is the      
default behavior of the existing ​dúchas.ie      
search engine as of May 2019. 

● Standardised​: For this experiment, the     
texts were standardised using the     
software described in Section 1.2, ​An      
Caighdeánaitheoir​, and then lowercased    
and converted to ASCII as in the       
Baseline experiment. 

● Demutated​: Irish words are subject to      
so-called ​initial mutations which are     
triggered in certain semantic and     
syntactic environments and which cause     
the words to appear with different initial       
sounds. With rare exceptions, mutations     
in Irish can be detected and removed       
algorithmically in a trivial way because      
they are transparently reflected in the      
orthography (as is the case for Scottish       
Gaelic, but not for the other Celtic       
languages: Manx Gaelic, Welsh, Breton,     
and Cornish). For this experiment, the      
texts were standardised, lowercased,    
converted to ASCII, and finally all initial       
mutations were removed. 

● Lemmatised​: Irish nouns and adjectives     
are inflected according to their case and       
number, and verbs are inflected     
according to tense, mood, person, and      
number. For this experiment, the texts      
were standardised, lowercased,   
converted to ASCII, and finally     
lemmatised by means of a lemmatiser      
which is part of the open source Irish        
grammar checker ​An Gramadóir​. In the      7
case of verbs, the lemmatised form is the        
singular imperative, which is the usual      
citation form in modern Irish     
dictionaries. 

 
For each experimental setup and for both test        

corpora, we preprocess the 2,000 documents in       
the corpus and the 72 search engine queries in         
our final list according to one of the schemes         
above. We then perform a full text search on the          
corpus for each of the 72 queries, recording the         
total number of returned documents and the       
number of those deemed to be “relevant” (here,        
by definition, relevant documents are those      
labeled with the topic corresponding to the given        
search query). For example, consider the query       
“An Nollaig”. This search is typical of many        
others in that it conforms to the standard        
orthography most familiar to users of the site,        
and as a consequence it returns no hits at all in           
the Baseline experiment because the texts in the        
test corpus where this phrase appears all use the         
prestandard spelling “An Nodlaig”. On the other       

7 ​https://www.cadhan.com/gramadoir/ 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 66



hand, in the Standardised experiment, the same       
query returns 21 documents from the test set,        
with 19 of the 21 carrying the correct label         
“Christmas”. This yields a precision of 19/21 ​≈        
0.90 and a recall of 0.19 (19 of the 100 relevant           
documents in the corpus) for this one query. 

3 Results and discussion 

In Table 1 we report Precision, Recall, and        
F-scores for each of the experiments described in        
the preceding section as applied to the corpus of         
Irish transcriptions, totalled over all 72 search       
queries. Table 2 provides the analogous results       
for the experiments applied to the corpus of        
machine-translated English transcriptions. Since    
the MT engine produces standard Irish as its        
output, we do not report results for the        
Standardised setup separately in Table 2 since       
those results are the same as for the Baseline. 
 

Experiment P R F 

Baseline 0.67 0.10 0.17 

Standardised 0.69 0.24 0.36 

Demutated 0.70 0.29 0.41 

Lemmatised 0.67 0.34 0.45 

Table 1. Precision/recall results – Irish 
transcriptions. 

 

Experiment P R F 

Translated + Baseline 0.59 0.15 0.24 

     "      + Demutated 0.59 0.17 0.26 

     "      + Lemmatised 0.60 0.21 0.31 

Table 2. Precision/recall results – English 
transcriptions machine-translated to Irish. 

 
Because the experimental setup is somewhat      
artificial, the absolute precision and recall values       
are not of great importance, but we do note in          
Table 1 a significant increase in recall over the         
baseline with the introduction of standardisation,      
and further increases with demutation and      
lemmatisation. These increases occur without     
any large decrease in precision. 

In looking more closely at the results, a few         
things stand out. First, even with full       
standardisation and lemmatisation, a recall score      
of 0.34 seems low. This is due in part to the           
quality of some of the experimental search       
queries. For instance, a few of the 72 queries         
returned no results at all under any of the         
experiments. In one case, a search term was        
misspelled beyond the ability of the standardiser       
to correct it (“​Oiche Shanmhna” for ‘Halloween’,       
correctly spelled “Oíche Shamhna” in the      
standard orthography). In another case, we      
generously interpreted the search query “ocras      
mór” (lit. ‘great hunger’) as an attempt to retrieve         
documents about the Irish potato famine, which       
indeed is sometimes referred to in English as        
“the Great Hunger”, but for which the correct        
Irish is “(an) ​Gorta Mór” (lit. ‘(the) great        
famine’). Another class of low-recall queries      
appear to be searches for the topics themselves as         
opposed to searches for terms likely to appear in         
the full text transcriptions; e.g. the queries       
“filíocht” (‘poetry’), “seanfhocail” (‘proverbs’),    
“tomhaiseanna” (‘riddles’) all have very low      
recall values under all of the experimental       
conditions. This could be overcome by including       
the topic or other metadata in the search index. 

The results in Table 2 show a similar increase         
in recall and no corresponding decrease in       
precision for the machine-translated English     
transcriptions. It is not surprising that the scores        
are somewhat lower than the ones in Table 1         
since the machine translation engine is far from        
perfect and certainly introduces some noise into       
the process. On the other hand, the true baseline         
in this case is a recall of 0.0, since the current           
dúchas.ie search engine does not support      
retrieval of English transcriptions via Irish      
queries. We are therefore encouraged by these       
results, especially given that they were achieved       
through relatively straightforward use of existing      
language technologies. 

4 Conclusion 

We set out to improve full-text search results on         
dúchas.ie using language technology, building     
on crowdsourced transcriptions of folklore     
manuscripts. We have gathered together a set of        
existing language technologies to achieve this      
goal. These include tools to standardise,      
demutate, lemmatise, and translate the     

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 67



transcriptions of these folklore stories. We have       
shown that the introduction of these technologies       
can substantially improve search engine recall      
over a test set of actual user queries, with no          
appreciable drop in precision. 

Motivated by these results, these technologies      
will be deployed in the search infrastructure on        
dúchas.ie​. We envisage that standardisation and      
machine translation will be applied by default, as        
the query logs show that the website users tend         
to search using standard spellings. Demutation      
and lemmatisation will likely be optional, and       
raw searches will still be possible, however,       
exact implementation has yet to be specified.       
Search spelling suggestions using a standard      
lexicon and spelling distance algorithm could      
also be added. 

A secondary outcome of this research was a        
list of common errors in the crowdsourced       
transcriptions. These terms were identified as      
errors by virtue of them not being present in a          
large corpus of texts from the period (Uí        
Dhonnchadha et al., 2014). We have categorised       
these errors, and they mostly involve (1)       
accented characters, (2) missing or spurious      
lenition (i.e. an orthographic ‘h’ following the       
initial consonant indicating phonetic weakening     
or deletion of the initial consonant (Welby et al.,         
2017)), or (3) the disordering of the letters ‘iu’ or          
‘iú’. This information will be used to improve        
instructions given to transcribers. 

Lastly, other collections in the NFC being       
digitised by the Dúchas project include another       
large manuscript collection and a large audio       
collection. If these collections are made available       
for transcription by members of the public, and if         
such efforts are as successful as previous efforts,        
access to these collections could be improved       
using the language technologies tested in the       
paper. 

Acknowledgements 

The ​Dúchas project is funded by the Department        
of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht with       
support from the National Lottery, University      
College Dublin, and the National Folklore      
Foundation, Ireland. 

References 

Arcan, Mihael, Caoilfhionn Lane, Eoin Ó      
Droighneáin, and Paul Buitelaar. 2016. IRIS:      

English-Irish Machine Translation System. ​The     
International Conference on Language Resources     
and Evaluation​, Portorož, Slovenia. 

Bhreathnach, Úna, Ciarán Mac Murchaidh, Gearóid Ó       
Cleircín, and Brian Ó Raghallaigh. 2019. Ní       
hualach do dhuine an léann: meithleacha pobail i        
ngort na Gaeilge. ​Léachtaí Cholm Cille​, Maynooth,       
Ireland. 

Dowling, Meghan, Teresa Lynn, Alberto Poncelas,      
and Andy Way. 2018. SMT versus NMT:       
Preliminary Comparisons for Irish. ​Proceedings of      
the Workshop on Technologies for MT of Low        
Resource Languages​, Boston, MA, 12–20. 

Dowling, Meghan, Teresa Lynn, Yvette Graham, and       
John Judge. 2016. English to Irish Machine       
Translation with Automatic Post-Editing. ​2​nd Celtic      
Language Technology Workshop​, Paris, France. 

Dowling, Meghan, Lauren Cassidy, Eimear Maguire,      
Teresa Lynn, Ankit Srivastava, and John Judge.       
2015. Tapadóir: Developing a statistical machine      
translation engine and associated resources for      
Irish. ​4​th LRL Workshop: Language Technologies      
in support of Less-Resourced Languages​, Poznan,      
Poland. 

Galley, Michel, and Christopher D. Manning. 2008. A        
simple and effective hierarchical phrase reordering      
model. ​Proceedings of the Conference on      
Empirical Methods in Natural Language     
Processing. Association for Computational    
Linguistics, 848–856. 

Heafield, Ken. 2011. KenLM: Faster and smaller       
language model queries. ​Proceedings of the 6​th       
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation​.     
Association for Computational Linguistics,    
187–197. 

Irish Folklore Commission. 1937. ​Irish Folklore and       
Tradition​. Department of Education, Dublin,     
Ireland. 

Judge, John, Ailbhe Ní Chasaide, Rose Ní       
Dhubhda, Kevin P. Scannell, and Elaine Uí       
Dhonnchadha. 2012. The Irish Language in the       
Digital Age. ​META-NET White Paper Series:      
Europe’s Languages in the Digital Age. ​Springer. 

Ó Cathain, Séamas. 1988. Súil siar ar Scéim na Scol          
1937-1938. ​Sinsear​, 5:19–30. 

Ó Cleircín, Gearóid, Anna Bale, and Brian Ó        
Raghallaigh. 2014. Dúchas.ie: ré nua i stair       
Chnuasach Bhéaloideas Éireann. ​Béaloideas​,    
82:85–99. 

Ryan, Catherine. 2015. ​MoTIF: Thesaurus     
Construction Guidelines​. Digital Repository of     
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 68



Scannell, Kevin. 2014. Statistical models for text       
normalization and machine translation.    
Proceedings of the 1​st Celtic Language Technology       
Workshop​, Dublin, Ireland, 33–40. 

Uí Dhonnchadha, Elaine, Kevin Scannell, Ruairí Ó       
hUiginn, Eilís Ní Mhearraí, Máire Nic Mhaoláin,       
Brian Ó Raghallaigh, Gregory Toner, Séamus Mac       
Mathúna, Déirdre D’Auria, Eithne Ní     
Ghallchobhair, and Niall O’Leary. 2014. Corpas na       
Gaeilge (1882-1926): Integrating Historical and     
Modern Irish Texts. ​Proceedings of the Workshop       
on Language Resources and Technologies for      
Processing and Linking Historical Documents and      
Archives – Deploying Linked Open Data in       
Cultural Heritage​, Reykjavik, Iceland, 12–18. 

Welby, Pauline, Máire Ní Chiosáin, and Brian Ó        
Raghallaigh. 2017. Total eclipse of the heart? The        
production of eclipsis in two speaking styles of        
Irish. ​Journal of the International Phonetic      
Association​, 47(2):125–153. 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 69


