





























Pluto: A Deep Learning based Watchdog for Anti Money Laundering

Hao-Yuan Chen 1 , Shang-Xuan Zou1 , Cheng-Lung Sung1
1Data Research & Development Center, CTBC Bank, Taipei, Taiwan

{haoyuan.chen, mi.zou, alan.sung}@ctbcbank.com

Abstract
Banks are faced with Anti-Money Laundering
(AML) obligations so they have to identify cus-
tomers by conducting negative news, aka ”adverse
media”, screening which consists of searching in-
formation in the public domain for news items,
publications, and government advisories and bul-
letins for information related an individual or en-
tity’s involvement in financial crime matters. Al-
though it is an essential way to determine who in
the group poses a higher risk for potential finan-
cial crime concerns by catching sophisticated ac-
tivities from negative news across globe, it also re-
quires heavy human capital and processing time on
screening daily produced negative news. There-
fore, poor efficiency becomes the most unaccept-
able obstacle based on this approach. To miti-
gate this issue, Pluto1 offers a distributed and scal-
able batch system embedded deep learning-based
Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques for
AML practitioners to improve daily task efficiency.
It performs text preprocessing, paragraph embed-
dings, and clustering algorithm on a set of negative
news and provide clustering result with keywords
and similarities for AML practitioners. The overall
feedback from AML practitioners are very positive
on such an impressive enhancement in which Pluto
reduces 67% efforts of negative news screening.

1 Introduction
Compliance with Anti-Money Laundering (AML) and Know
Your Customer (KYC) duties require identity checks against
potential money launderers, terrorists, or people considered
high risk in the financial field. Although the concept is rea-
sonable and feasible, there are tremendous challenges on in-
sufficient approaches capable of offering an effective and ef-
ficient solution. It triggers lots of techniques been proposed
in real world industry [Han et al., 2018].

We leverages GlobalVision’s Patriot Officer2 to discover
whether customers are high-risk individuals or not via check-

1A cartoon dog created in 1930 at Walt Disney Productions.
2http://www.gv-systems.com/products-solutions/patriot-officer/

ing on a variety of watchlists (e.g., Dow Jones Watchlist)
across the globe. One of the required steps is to screen plenty
of related documents associated with several watchlists which
are related to a single customer. It is an effective method
to identify hidden criminal activities but not an efficient one.
The volume of daily-crawled content are sometimes greater
than the ones consumed by practitioners. It makes practition-
ers engage in investigation with massive human capital cost
and processing time. Therefore, improving operational effi-
ciency is the top priority for such an approach.

We propose an idea of on-demand document clustering
through client-server model batch processing system in or-
der to alleviate suffering in practitioners’ daily task. It aims
to group a set of documents in a way we proposed so that the
documents in the same group are similar to each other than to
those in other groups. It provides a web-based user interface
(UI) not only revealing clustering result in tree-view structure
accompanied by related keywords but showing similarity be-
tween the latest one and the others within each group as well.
The purpose is to support practitioners conducting an effec-
tive decision-making in such an efficient way.

2 Design and Implementation
In this section, we introduce the details on Pluto architecture
and method based on NLP and fundamental algorithms. It
only supports the articles published in Traditional Chinese
(zh-TW) at this stage.

2.1 Architecture
The client-server model batch processing system follows a
micro-service oriented distributed architecture [Fehling et al.,
2014] presented in Figure 1.

The API service provides REST endpoints for the inter-
action between the UI and the Patriot Officer. It triggers pro-
cessing pipelines by sending clustering job into AMQP3 when
receiving requests from Patriot Officer and provides the clus-
tering result information for UI from DB. The Workers ser-
vice fetches jobs from AMQP to proceed pipeline for docu-
ment clustering based on proposed solutions. The UI allows

3AMQP is an open standard application layer protocol used for
queuing and routing messages between the services in a secure and
reliable way

93
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Financial Technology and Natural Language Processing 

(FinNLP@IJCAI 2019), pages 93-95, Macao, China, August 12, 2019.

http://www.gv-systems.com/products-solutions/patriot-officer/


Figure 1: Pluto Architecture

practitioners to retrieve clustering information related to the
specific watchlist.

The batch processing system is scalable. The quantity
of Workers can be scale up and down according to quantity
of jobs residing in AMQP, which makes the system achieve
throughput guarantee.

2.2 Method
The pipeline comprises three sequential components: text
preprocessing, paragraph embeddings construction, and clus-
tering. Input is a set of documents associated to a single
watchlist, and the output is a set of clusters containing all
documents and the similarities within a single cluster.

Initially, we pick up tokens that match keywords offered
by AML practitioners or be tagged as human names and pro-
prietary nouns such as political groups, administrative unit,
facilities, locations, organizations, and etc. Sinica CKIP to-
kenizer and POS tagger [Ma and Chen, 2003] are the major
NLP techniques on this topic. The extracted tokens are re-
garded as representative for each document.

Next, we build the vector representation by Distributed
Bag of Words version of Paragraph Vector (PV-DBOW)
model [Le and Mikolov, 2014] which not only being con-
ceptually simple but also requires to store less data. More-
over, it ignores the context words, which aligns the empirical
insights from AML practitioner. The adopted deep learning-
based techniques revealed from [Mikolov et al., 2013a] and
[Mikolov et al., 2013b] is implemented by Gensim4 for this
stage.

Eventually, we infer vectors for documents based on para-
graph embeddings and apply Balanced Iterative Reducing
and Clustering Using Hierarchies (BIRCH) [Zhang et al.,
1996] to proceed clustering. The reason why we adopt it is
that BIRCH, one of the developments in hierarchical cluster-
ing, does not require us to pre-specify the number of clusters
and is a memory-efficient and time-efficient approach. [Xu
and Tian, 2015]

3 Evaluation
To show the effect of Pluto, we cooperate with professionals
of AML to quantitate the performance via user testing. We

4https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/index.html

divide users into 2 groups: (1) reading news without clustered
news and (2) reading news with Pluto.

For Pluto users, we implement a web interface to show the
performance difference. As shown in Figure 2, the original
system provides only an URL list, while Pluto visualizes neg-
ative news into clusters with keywords and similarities. With
the interface, users can comprehend the news efficiently, and
determine the suspect customer fast.

To evalute the performance, both groups read the same
news set contains 3000 news. As a result, Pluto reduces 67%
time in average to judge if the customer suspected of monen
laundering.

(a) Original User Interface

(b) Pluto User Interface

Figure 2: Pluto offers grouped negative news annotated with key-
words and similarities. In Figure 2b, the left side is tree-view struc-
ture for navigation purpose, and the right side is the pane for anno-
tated negative news.

4 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we propose a distributed architecture batch sys-
tem based on NLP techniques to organize daily negative news
and offer an UI for information visualization. At present,
the entire system is at piloting stage in our private cloud
and facilitates efficient work flow among AML investigations
pipeline.

In the future, we will (1) adopt our system to multilingual
use cases, especially including Simplified Chinese (zh-CN)
and English (en). (2) utilize NLP techniques in further invest-
gation in which we may embrace named entity recognition
(NER) and relation extraction (RE) to build the relation net-
work identifying target suspicious entities, events, and time,
and location.

94

https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/index.html


References
[Fehling et al., 2014] Christoph Fehling, Frank Leymann,

Ralph Retter, Walter Schupeck, and Peter Arbitter. Cloud
Computing Patterns: Fundamentals to Design, Build, and
Manage Cloud Applications. Springer, 2014.

[Han et al., 2018] Jingguang Han, Utsab Barman, Jeremiah
Hayes, Jinhua Du, Edward Burgin, and Dadong Wan.
Nextgen aml: Distributed deep learning based language
technologies to augment anti money laundering investiga-
tion. In Proceedings of ACL 2018, System Demonstrations,
pages 37–42, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

[Le and Mikolov, 2014] Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. Dis-
tributed representations of sentences and documents. In
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 32,
ICML’14, pages II–1188–II–1196. JMLR.org, 2014.

[Ma and Chen, 2003] Wei-Yun Ma and Keh-Jiann Chen. In-
troduction to ckip chinese word segmentation system for
the first international chinese word segmentation bakeoff.
In Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chi-
nese Language Processing - Volume 17, SIGHAN ’03,
pages 168–171, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2003. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

[Mikolov et al., 2013a] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg
Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781,
2013.

[Mikolov et al., 2013b] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai
Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Distributed rep-
resentations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In Proceedings of the 26th International Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume
2, NIPS’13, pages 3111–3119, USA, 2013. Curran Asso-
ciates Inc.

[Xu and Tian, 2015] Dongkuan Xu and Yingjie Tian. A
comprehensive survey of clustering algorithms. Annals of
Data Science, 2(2):165–193, Jun 2015.

[Zhang et al., 1996] Tian Zhang, Raghu Ramakrishnan, and
Miron Livny. Birch: An efficient data clustering method
for very large databases. In Proceedings of the 1996
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
of Data, SIGMOD ’96, pages 103–114, New York, NY,
USA, 1996. ACM.

95


