




































Post-editese: an Exacerbated Translationese

Antonio Toral
Center for Language and Cognition

University of Groningen
The Netherlands

a.toral.ruiz@rug.nl

Abstract

Post-editing (PE) machine translation
(MT) is widely used for dissemination
because it leads to higher productivity than
human translation from scratch (HT). In
addition, PE translations are found to be of
equal or better quality than HTs. However,
most such studies measure quality solely
as the number of errors. We conduct a
set of computational analyses in which
we compare PE against HT on three dif-
ferent datasets that cover five translation
directions with measures that address
different translation universals and laws of
translation: simplification, normalisation
and interference. We find out that PEs are
simpler and more normalised and have
a higher degree of interference from the
source language than HTs.

1 Introduction

Machine translation (MT) is nowadays widely
used in industry for dissemination purposes by
means of post-editing (PE, also referred to as
PEMT in the literature), a machine-assisted ap-
proach to translation that results in notable in-
creases in translation productivity compared to un-
aided human translation (HT), as shown in nu-
merous research studies, e.g. Plitt and Mas-
selot (2010).

In theory, one would claim that HTs1 and PE
translations are clearly different, since, in the

c© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.
1By HT we refer to translations produced by a human from
scratch, i.e. without the assistance of an MT system or any
other computer-assisted technology, e.g. translation memo-
ries.

translation workflow of the latter, the translator is
primed by the output of an MT system (Green et
al., 2013), resulting in a translation that should
then contain, to some extent, the footprint of that
MT system. Because of this, one would conclude
that HT should be preferred over PE, as the former
should be more natural and adhere more closely
to the norms of the target language. However,
many research studies have shown that the qual-
ity of PE is comparable to that of HT or even bet-
ter, e.g. Koponen (2016), and, according to one
study (Bowker and Buitrago Ciro, 2015), native
speakers do not have a clear preference for HT over
PE.

In this paper we conduct a set of computational
analyses on several datasets that contain HTs and
PEs, involving different language directions and
domains as well as PE performed according to dif-
ferent guidelines (e.g. full versus light). Our aim is
to find out whether HT and PE differ significantly
in terms of different phenomena. Since previous
research has proven the existence of translationese,
i.e. the fact that HT and original text exhibit dif-
ferent characteristics, our current research can be
framed as a quest to find out whether there is ev-
idence of post-editese, i.e. the fact that HT (or
translationese) and PE would be different.

The characteristics of translationese can be
grouped along the so-called universal features of
translation or translation universals (Baker, 1993),
namely simplification, normalisation (also referred
to as homogeneisation) and explicitation. In ad-
dition to these three, interference is recognised as
a fundamental law of translation (Toury, 2012):
“phenomena pertaining to the make-up of the
source text tend to be transferred to the target text”.
In a nutshell, compared to original texts, transla-
tions tend to be simpler, more standardised, and

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 273



more explicit and they retain some characteristics
that pertain to the source language.

In this study then we study the existence of post-
editese by conducting a set of computational anal-
yses that fall into three2 out of these four cate-
gories. With these analyses we aim to answer a
number of research questions:

• RQ1. Does post-editese exist? I.e. is there
evidence that PE exhibits different character-
istics than HT?

• RQ2. If the answer to RQ1 is yes, then which
are the main characteristics of PE? I.e. how
does it differ from HT?

• RQ3. If the answer to RQ1 is yes, then, are
there different post-editeses? I.e. are there
any characteristics that distinguish the post-
editese produced by MT systems that fol-
low different paradigms (rule-based, statisti-
cal phrase-based and neural)?

The rest of this paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 provides an overview of the related work.
Section 3 covers the experimental setup and the ex-
periments conducted. Finally, Section 4 presents
our conclusions and suggests lines of future work.

2 Related Work

Many research studies carried out during the last
decade have compared the quality of HT and PE.
These have shown that the quality of PE is com-
parable to that of HT, e.g. Garcı́a (2010), or even
better, e.g. Guerberof (2009) and Plitt and Mas-
selot (2010). In these studies quality is typically
measured in terms of the number of mistakes in
each translation condition. However, they do not
take into account other relevant aspects that may
flag important differences between HTs and PEs,
such as the perspective of the end-user or the pres-
ence of different phenomena in both types of trans-
lations. A recent strand of work targets precisely
these, (i) by collecting the preference of end users
between HT and PE and (ii) by analysing the char-
acteristics of both types of translations. In the fol-
lowing subsections we report on recent work con-
ducted in both of these two research lines.

2.1 Preference between HT and PE
Fiederer and O’Brien (2009) compared HT and
PE for the English-to-German translation of text
2Explicitation is not addressed in our experiments.

from a software user manual. Participants ranked
both conditions equally for clarity, PE higher than
HT for accuracy and HT higher than PE for style.
When asked to choose their favourite translation,
HT obtained a higher percentage of preferences
than PE: 63% to 37%.

Bowker (2009) presented French- and English-
speaking minorities in Canada four translations
(HT, full PE, light PE and raw MT) of three short
governmental texts (approximately 325 words)
written in a relatively clear, neutral style with rea-
sonably short sentences. Preference took into ac-
count not only the quality of the translations but
also the time and cost required to produce them.
The results were rather different for each group. In
the French-speaking minority group 71% preferred
HT versus 29% PE (21% full and 8% light). How-
ever, half of the participants were language profes-
sionals, which skewed the results. In fact, when
they were removed the results changed drastically:
56% preferred HT versus 44% PE (29% full, 15%
light). As for the English minority, 8% preferred
HT versus 87% PE (38% full, 49% light) and 4%
raw MT.

Bowker and Buitrago Ciro (2015) presented
Spanish-speaking immigrants in Canada with four
translations (HT, full PE, light PE and raw MT)
of three short texts (301 to 380 words) containing
library-related information and asked them which
they prefered. PE and HT attained a similar num-
ber of preferences; 49% of respondents preferred
PE (24% full and 25% light, respectively) com-
pared to 42% who preferred HT. Raw MT lagged
considerably behind with the remaining 9% of the
preferences.

Green et al. (2013) assessed the quality of HT
versus PE for Wikipedia articles translated from
English into Arabic, French and German. Qual-
ity was measured by means of preference, done by
ranking on isolated sentences via crowdsourcing.
PE was found significantly better for all translation
directions.

2.2 Characteristics of HT and PE

Daems et al (2017) used HT and PE news trans-
lated from English into Dutch. They presented
them to translation students and colleagues, whose
task was to identify which translations were PE.
They also tried an automated approach, for which
they built a classifier with 55 features using surface
forms and linguistic information at lexical, syntac-

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 274



Dataset Direction PE type MT systems # Sent. pairs Domain
Taraxü en→de Light3

2 SMT, 2 RBMT
272

Newsde→en 240
es→de4 101

IWSLT
en→de

Light
4 NMT, 4 SMT

600 Subtitles
en→fr 2 NMT, 3 SMT

MS zh→en Full 1 NMT5 1,0006 News

Table 1: Information about the datasets used in the experiments

tic and semantic levels. No proof of the existence
of post-editese was found, either perceived (stu-
dents) or measurable (classifier).

Čulo and Nitzke (2016) compared MT, PE and
HT in terms of terminology and found that the way
terminology is used in PE is closer to MT than to
HT and has less variation than in HT.

Farrell (2018) identified MT markers (i.e.
“translation solutions which occurred with a sta-
tistically significantly higher frequency in PEMT
than in HT”) in short texts from Wikipedia trans-
lated from English into Italian and found that MT
tends to choose a subset of all the possible trans-
lation solutions (the most frequent ones) and that
this is the case also, to some extent, in PEs. HTs
and PEs were also compared in terms of number
of errors, which were found to be comparable, cor-
roborating the findings of the literature covered at
the beginning of this section.

Our contribution falls into this research line, to
which we contribute a computational study whose
analyses are chosen to align to translation univer-
sals and laws of translation and that covers multi-
ple languages and domains.

3 Experiments

In this section we first describe the datasets used
(Section 3.1), and then report on each of the exper-
iments that we carried out in the subsequent sub-
sections: lexical variety (Section 3.2), lexical den-
sity (Section 3.3), length ratio (Section 3.4) and
3“Translators were asked to perform only the minimal post-
editing necessary to achieve an acceptable translation qual-
ity.” (Avramidis et al., 2014)
4This dataset contains an additional translation direction
(de→es) which is not used here due to its small size; 40 sen-
tence pairs.
5The MT systems used in the MT and in the PE condition are
not the same. The one in the MT condition is the best system
in Hassan et al. (2018) while the one in the PE condition is
Google Translate, again as provided in Hassan et al. (2018).
6The original dataset contains 2,001 sentences. We only use
the subset in which the source text is original instead of trans-
lationese (Toral et al., 2018).

part-of-speech sequences (Section 3.5).

3.1 Datasets

We make use of three datasets in all our ex-
periments: Taraxü (Avramidis et al., 2014),
IWSLT (Cettolo et al., 2015; Mauro et al., 2016)
and Microsoft “Human Parity” (Hassan et al.,
2018), henceforth referred to as MS. These
datasets cover five different translation directions
that involve five languages:7 English↔German,
English→French, Spanish→German and
Chinese→English. In addition, this choice of
datasets allows us to include a longitudinal aspect
into the analyses since there are state-of-the-art
MT systems from almost one decade ago (in
Taraxü), from three and four years ago (IWSLT)
and from just one year ago (MS). Table 1 shows
detailed information about each dataset, namely its
translation direction(s), type of PE done, paradigm
of the MT system(s) used, number of sentence
pairs and domain of its text.

We note the following two limitations in some
of the datasets:

• Mismatch of translator competence. Both PE
and HT are carried out by professional trans-
lators in two of the datasets (Taraxü and MS).
However, in the remaining one, IWSLT, pro-
fessional translators do PE, while the transla-
tors doing HT are not necessarily profession-
als8. Thus, if we find differences between PEs
and HTs, for this dataset this may not be (en-
tirely) due to the two translations procedures
leading to different translations but (also) to
the different translations being produced by
translators with different levels of proficiency.

7In the tables and experiments we will refer to languages with
their ISO-2 codes.
8“We accept all fluently bilingual volunteers as trans-
lators”, https://translations.ted.com/
TED_Translator_Resources:_Main_guide#
Translation

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 275



Translation Dataset and translation direction
type Taraxü IWSLT MS

de→en en→de es→de en→de en→fr zh→en
HT 0.26 0.27 0.31 0.20 0.16 0.14
PE -2.05% -1.81% †-1.27% -3.86% -1.17% -4.76%
MT -2.94% -3.62% -5.91% -10.93% -6.04% -6.96%
PE-NMT -4.21% -1.88% -4.76%
PE-SMT -1.59% -1.31% †-1.03% -3.50% -0.70%
PE-RBMT -2.79% -2.04% -3.05%
NMT -12.22% -8.18% -7.33%
SMT -2.36% -2.36% -6.42% -9.63% -4.61%
RBMT -3.08% -4.26% -7.78%

Table 2: TTR scores for HT and relative differences for PE and MT. For directions with more than one MT system, the result
shown in rows PE and MT uses the average score of all the PEs or MT outputs, respectively. The best result (highest TTR) in
each group of rows is shown in bold. If a † is not shown then the TTR for HT is significantly higher than the TTRs for all the
translations in that cell (the 95% confidence interval of the TTR of HT, obtained with bootstrap resampling, is higher and there
is no overlap).

• Source language being translationese. In two
of the datasets (MS and IWSLT), the source
language and the language in which those
texts were originally written is the same. This
is not the case however for Taraxü, for which
the original language of the source texts is
Czech. We can still compare MT to PE al-
though we need to take into account that
these texts are easier for MT than original
texts (Toral et al., 2018). However the com-
parison between PE (or MT) and HT is prob-
lematic since the HT was not translated from
the source language but from another lan-
guage (Czech).

3.2 Lexical Variety
We assess the lexical variety of a translation (MT,
PE or HT) by calculating its type-token ratio
(TTR), as shown in equation 1.

TTR =
number of types

number of tokens
(1)

Farrell (2018) observed that MT tends to pro-
duce a subset of all the possible translations in the
target language (the ones used most frequently in
the training data). Therefore, we hypothesise the
TTR of MT, and by extension that of PE too, to be
lower than that of HT. If this is the case, then PE
would be, in terms of lexical variety, simpler than
HT.

Table 2 shows the results for each dataset and
language direction. In all cases the lexical variety
in PE is lower than in HT, and again in all cases,
that of MT is lower than that of PE. This could

be interpreted as follows: (i) lexical variety is low
in MT because these systems prefer the translation
solutions most frequently used in the training data;
(ii) a post-editor will add lexical variety to some
degree, but because MT primes him/her, the result-
ing translation will not achieve the level of lexical
diversity that is attained in HT.

We now look at the results of PE and MT for dif-
ferent MT paradigms. In the Taraxü dataset we can
compare rule-based and statistical MT systems.
Rule-based MT has a lower TTR in all three trans-
lation directions of this dataset and this is then re-
flected in a lower TTR again when a system of this
paradigm is used for post-editing. In the IWSLT
dataset we can confront statistical and neural MT
systems. In all cases the lexical variety of neural
MT is lower than that of statistical MT. Again, the
same trend shows when we look at their PEs. This
is perhaps a surprising result, since NMT systems
outperformed SMT in the IWSLT dataset, in terms
of HTER (Cettolo et al., 2015).

3.3 Lexical Density
Lexical density measures the amount of informa-
tion present in a text by calculating the ratio be-
tween the number of content words (adverbs, ad-
jectives, nouns and verbs) and its total number of
words, as shown in equation 2.

lex density =
number of content words

number of total words
(2)

Translationese has been found to have a lower
percentage of content words than original texts,

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 276



Translation Dataset and translation direction
Type Taraxü IWSLT MS

de→en en→de es→de en→de en→fr zh→en
HT 0.55 0.53 0.53 0.48 0.46 0.59
PE -1.00% -2.48% -4.31% -3.46% -1.24% -0.46%
MT -0.81% -0.69% -4.53% -5.14% -0.94% -2.37%
PE-NMT -3.88% -1.47% -0.46%
PE-SMT -0.54% -2.87% -4.78% -3.04% -1.09%
PE-RBMT -1.46% -2.09% -3.84%
NMT -6.31% -3.14% -2.37%
SMT -0.80% 0.14% -3.45% -3.98% 0.53%
RBMT -0.83% -1.51% -5.61%

Table 3: Lexical density scores for HT and relative differences for PE and MT. For directions with more than one MT system,
the result shown in rows PE and MT uses the average score of all the PEs or MT outputs, respectively. The best result (highest
density) in each group of rows is shown in bold.

thus being, from this point of view, lexically sim-
pler (Scarpa, 2006). To identify and count content
words we tag the target sides of the datasets with
their parts-of-speech (PoS) using UDPipe (Straka
et al., 2016), a PoS tagger that uses the Universal
PoS tagset.9 Then we assess the lexical density of
each translation (HT, PE and MT) using this PoS-
tagged version10 of the datasets.

Table 3 shows the results. In both PE and MT
the lexical density is lower than in HT. However
between PE and MT, there is no systematic dis-
tinction. When inspecting PEs using different MT
paradigms, we do not find any clear trend between
SMT and RBMT, but one such trend shows up
when we inspect SMT and NMT: in the two com-
parisons we can establish in our dataset (the two
translation directions in the IWSLT dataset), PE-
NMT leads to a lower lexical density than PE-
SMT. Finally, looking at MT outputs produced by
different types of MT systems, we observe that
both RBMT and NMT lead to lower lexical den-
sities than SMT.

3.4 Length Ratio

Given a source text ST and a target text TT , i.e.
TT is a translation of the ST (HT, PE or MT), we
compute the absolute difference in length (mea-
sured in characters) between the two, normalised
by the length of the ST , as shown in equation 3.

9https://universaldependencies.org/u/pos/
10UDPipe’s PoS tagging F1-score is over 90% for all the
three target languages considered: de, en and fr (Straka and
Straková, 2017, Table 2)

length ratio =
|lengthST − lengthTT |

lengthST
(3)

Because (i) MT results in a translation of simi-
lar length to that of the ST,11 and PE is primed by
the MT output while (ii) a translator working from
scratch (HT) may translate more freely in terms of
length, we hypothesise that the difference in ab-
solute length is smaller for MT and PE than it is
for HT. If this is true, it would be a case of inter-
ference in PE, as the typical length of sentences
translated with this method would be similar to the
length used in the source text.

We compute this ratio at sentence level and av-
erage over all the sentences of the dataset. Table
4 shows the results for each dataset and language
direction. The results in datasets Taraxü and MS
match our hypothesis; in both datasets the length
ratio is lower for PE and MT than it is for HT. This
is also the case for MT in dataset IWSLT. How-
ever, in the results for PE in dataset IWSLT, the
ratio of PE is actually higher than that of HT for
en→fr, which seems to contradict our hypothesis.
This may be attributed to the difference in trans-
lation proficiency between the translators that did
HT and those that did PE that we commented upon
in Section 3.1. The latter are professional, while
the first could be non-professional. It is known

11This is necessary the case for RBMT and SMT as the num-
ber of TL tokens they can produce per each SL token is lim-
ited; e.g. the longest a translation with SMT can be is the
number of tokens in the ST multiplied by the longest phrase
in the phrase table, which is typically 7. NMT does not have
this limitation, so we do not argue in this direction for that
MT paradigm.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 277



Dataset Direct. Length ratioHT PE MT

Taraxü
de→en 0.16 ‡-38.5% †-36.9%
en→de 0.22 ‡-33.4% ‡-38.5%
es→de 0.17 *-25.2% -21.0%

IWSLT
en→de 0.17 -3.4% †-18.8%
en→fr 0.18 6.7% -10.9%

MS zh→en 1.41 ‡-9.9% ‡-9.1%

Table 4: Length ratio scores for HT and relative differences
for PE and MT. For directions with more than one MT sys-
tem, the result shown in columns PE and MT uses the aver-
age length ratio of all the PEs or MT outputs, respectively.
* indicates that the score for HT is significantly higher with
α = 0.05 († with α = 0.01 and ‡ with α = 0.001) than the
scores of all the PEs/MTs represented in the cell, based on
one-tailed paired t-tests.

en→de de→en es→de
0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

ht
pesmt1
pesmt2
perbmt1
perbmt2

Translation direction

Le
ng

th
 ra

tio

Figure 1: Length ratio for HT and PEs in the Taraxü dataset.

that non-professional translators tend to produce
more literal translations, whose length should then
be similar to that of the source text.

We now look at the length ratio of PEs that
use different MT systems. Figure 1 shows the
length ratios of HTs and PEs that use different
MT paradigms (SMT and RBMT) in the Taraxü
dataset. While for one of the translation direc-
tion (en→de) the ratio of PE-SMT and PE-RBMT
are similar, the two PE-RBMT systems have lower
length ratios than the two PE-SMT systems in the
other two translation directions.

3.5 Part-of-Speech Sequences

We assess the interference of the source language
on a translation (HT, PE and MT) by measuring
how close the sequence of PoS tags in the transla-
tion is to the typical PoS sequences of the source
language and to the typical PoS sequences of the
target language. If the sequences of PoS tags used
in a translation A are more similar to the typical se-
quences of the source language than the sequences
of another translation B, that could be an indica-

tion that A has more interference from the source
language than B.

Given a PoS-tagged translation T , a language
model of a PoS-tagged corpus in the source lan-
guage LMSL and a language model of a PoS-
tagged corpus in the target language LMTL, we
calculate the difference of the perplexities of T
with respect to both language models, as shown
in equation 4.

PP diff = PP (T, LMSL)− PP (T, LMTL)
(4)

A high result for a translation T would indicate
that T is dissimilar to the source language (high
perplexity with respect to the source language)
and similar to the target language (low perplexity
with respect to the target language). Conversely,
a low result would indicate that T is similar to the
source language (low perplexity with respect to the
source language) and dissimilar to the target lan-
guage (high perplexity with respect to the target
language).

Because MT systems are known to perform
less reordering than human translators (Toral and
Sánchez-Cartagena, 2017), our hypothesis is that
MT outputs, and by extension PEs, are more sim-
ilar in terms of PoS sequences to the source lan-
guage than HTs are. This would mean that PEs
and MT outputs have more interference in terms
of PoS sequences than HTs.

For each language in our datasets (de, en, es, fr
and zh), we PoS tag a monolingual corpus12 with
UDPipe, the PoS tagger already introduced in Sec-
tion 3.3.13

We then build language models on these PoS
tagged data with SRILM (Stolcke, 2002), consid-
ering n-grams up to n = 6, using interpolation and
Witten-Bell smoothing.14 Because we use the Uni-
12The corpora used for the different languages belong to the
same domain, news. We use corpora of roughly the same size
(around 100MB of text). This leads to corpora of between
1,617,527 sentences (es) and 2,187,421 (de).
13While in Section 3.3 we PoS-tagged the target side of the
datasets, in this experiment we PoS-tag both the source and
target sides. UDPipe’s PoS tagging F1-score is over 90% for
four of the five languages involved (de, en, es and fr) and
83% for the remaining one: zh (Straka and Straková, 2017,
Table 2). Given the lower performance of PoS tagging for
zh, the results involving this language should be taken with
caution.
14The more advanced smoothing method Kneser-Ney did not
work because the count-of-count statistics in our datasets are
not suitable for this smoothing method, which may be due to
the very small size of our vocabulary: the Universal Depen-
dencies PoS tagset.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 278



Translation Dataset and translation direction
Type Taraxü IWSLT MS

de→en en→de es→de en→de en→fr zh→en
HT 5.12 5.09 9.41 5.01 2.47 17.23
PE -13.84% -11.29% -8.58% -6.26% -2.03% -3.26%
MT -33.65% -32.25% -20.71% -18.66% -11.07% -3.1%
PE-NMT -3.41% -1.40% -3.26%
PE-SMT -11.72% -13.37% -10.48% -9.10% -2.46%
PE-RBMT -15.95% -9.20% -6.68%
NMT -5.89% -2.58% -3.10%
SMT -30.07% -41.71% -26.30% -31.43% -7.95%
RBMT -37.24% -22.80% -15.13%

Table 5: Perplexity difference scores for HT and relative differences for PE and MT. For directions with more than one MT
system, the result shown in rows PE and MT uses the average score of all the PEs or MT outputs, respectively. The best result
(highest perplexity) in each group of rows is shown in bold.

versal PoS tagset, the set of PoS tags is the same
for all the languages, which means that all our lan-
guage models share the same vocabulary.

Table 5 shows the results. In terms of HT versus
PE and MT, we observe similar trends to those ob-
served earlier for lexical variety (Table 2), namely
MT obtains the lowest perplexity difference score
and HT the highest, with PE lying somewhere be-
tween the two. The only exception to this is seen in
the MS dataset, where the value for MT is slightly
higher than that for PE (-3.1% versus -3.26%). It
should be taken into account, as already explained
in Section 3.1, that the MT systems in the MT and
PE conditions are different in this dataset, with the
one in the MT condition being substantially bet-
ter (Hassan et al., 2018). Overall, we interpret
these results as MT being the translation type that
contains the most interference in terms of PoS se-
quences, followed by PE.

We now look at the PE and MT results under
different MT paradigms. Comparing SMT and
NMT, the results indicate that the latter has less
interference, both in PE and MT conditions. This
corroborates earlier research that compared SMT
and NMT in terms of reordering (Bentivogli et al.,
2016). We do not find clear trends when compar-
ing SMT and RBMT though.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

We have carried out a set of computational anal-
yses on three datasets that contain five translation
directions with the aim of finding out whether post-
edited translations (PEs) exhibit different phenom-
ena than human translations from scratch (HTs).
In other words, whether there is evidence of the

existence of post-editese. The analyses conducted
measure aspects related to translation universals
and laws of translation, namely simplification, nor-
malisation and interference. With these analysis,
we find evidence of post-editese (RQ1), whose
main characteristics (RQ2) we summarise as fol-
lows:

• PEs have lower lexical variety and lower lex-
ical density than HTs. We link these to
the simplification principle of translationese.
Thus, these results indicate that post-editese
is lexically simpler than translationese.

• Sentence length in PEs is more similar to the
sentence length of the source texts, than sen-
tence length in HTs. We link this finding to
interference and normalisation: (i) PEs have
interference from the source text in terms of
length, which leads to translations that follow
the typical sentence length of the source lan-
guage; (ii) this results in a target text whose
length tends to become normalised.

• Part-of-speech (PoS) sequences in PEs are
more similar to the typical PoS sequences of
the source language, than PoS sequences in
HTs. We link this to the interference prin-
ciple: the sequences of grammatical units in
PEs preserve to some extent the sequences
that are typical of the source language.

In the paper we have not considered only HTs
and PEs but also MT outputs, from the MT systems
that were the starting point to produce the PEs.
This to corroborate a claim in the literature (Green

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 279



et al., 2013), namely that in PE the translator is
primed by the MT output. We expected then to
find similar trends to those found in PEs also in
MT outputs and this was indeed the case in all
four experiments. In two of the experiments, lex-
ical variety and PoS sequences, the results of PE
were somewhere in the middle between those of
HT and MT. Our interpretation is that a post-editor
improves the initial MT output in terms of variety
and PoS sequences, but due to being primed by the
MT output, the result cannot attain the level of HT,
and the footprint of the MT system remains in the
resulting PE.

We have also looked at different MT paradigms
(rule-based, statistical and neural), to find out
whether these lead to different characteristics in
the resulting PEs (RQ3). Neural MT diminishes
to some extent the interference in terms of PoS
sequences, probably because it is better at re-
ordering (Bentivogli et al., 2016). Statistical MT
has obtained better results than the other two MT
paradigms in terms of lexical variety, and also bet-
ter than neural MT, but on par with rule-based MT,
in lexical density.

In a nutshell, we have found that PEs tend to be
simpler and more normalised and to have a higher
degree of interference from the source text than
HTs. This seems to be caused because these char-
acteristics are already present in the MT outputs
that are the starting point of the PEs. We find thus
evidence of post-editese, which can be thought of
as an exacerbated translationese.

While PE is very useful in terms of productiv-
ity, which arguably is the main reason behind its
wide adoption in industry, the findings of this pa-
per flag a potential issue. Because PEs are sim-
pler and have a higher interference from the source
language than HTs, the extensive use of PE rather
than HT may have serious implications for the tar-
get language in the long term, for example that it
becomes impoverished (simplification) and overly
influenced by the source language (interference).
At the same time, we have shown that these issues
cannot be attributed to PE per se but that they orig-
inate in the MT systems used as the starting point
for PE. Identifying these issues might be then the
first step for further research on addressing these
problems in current state-of-the-art MT systems.

Throughout the paper, we have assumed that
lexical diversity and density correlate directly with
translation quality; i.e. the more diverse and dense

a translation the better. In this regard, we acknowl-
edge that in translation there is a tension between
diversity and consistency, especially in technical
translation. At the same time, none of our datasets
falls under the domain of technical texts.

We also acknowledge that our study is based on
rather superficial linguistic features, either at sur-
face or morphological level (PoS tags). For fu-
ture work, therefore, we plan to explore the use
of additional features, especially relying on deeper
linguistic analyses. In addition, we plan to study
the overlap between multiple HTs and PEs for the
same text, to assess whether it is higher between
PEs, which would indicate a higher degree of ho-
mogeneisation.

Another line we would like to pursue is that
of automatic discrimination between PE and HT.
While this has been shown to be possible with a
high degree of accuracy between original texts and
HTs, this is not the case for PE versus HT in the
attempts conducted to date (Daems et al., 2017).

Finally, we would like to point out that all our
code and data are publicly released,15 so we en-
courage interested parties to use these resources to
conduct further analyses.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Luisa Bentivogli, Joke
Daems, Michael Farrell, Lieve Macken and Maja
Popović for pointing me to relevant datasets and
related papers and for insightful discussions on the
topic of this paper. I would also like to thank the
reviewers; their comments have definitely led to
improve this paper.

References
Avramidis, Eleftherios, Aljoscha Burchardt, Sabine

Hunsicker, Maja Popovic, Cindy Tscherwinka,
David Vilar, and Hans Uszkoreit. 2014. The taraxü
corpus of human-annotated machine translations. In
LREC, pages 2679–2682.

Baker, Mona. 1993. Corpus linguistics and transla-
tion studies: Implications and applications. Text and
technology: In honour of John Sinclair, 233:250.

Bentivogli, Luisa, Arianna Bisazza, Mauro Cettolo, and
Marcello Federico. 2016. Neural versus phrase-
based machine translation quality: a case study. In
Su, Jian, Xavier Carreras, and Kevin Duh, editors,
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical

15https://github.com/antot/posteditese_
mtsummit19

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 280



Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
2016, Austin, Texas, USA, November 1-4, 2016,
pages 257–267. The Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Bowker, Lynne and Jairo Buitrago Ciro. 2015. Investi-
gating the usefulness of machine translation for new-
comers at the public library. Translation and Inter-
preting Studies, 10(2):165–186.

Bowker, Lynne. 2009. Can machine translation meet
the needs of official language minority communi-
ties in canada? a recipient evaluation. Linguis-
tica Antverpiensia, New Series–Themes in Transla-
tion Studies, (8).

Cettolo, Mauro, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Luisa
Bentivogli, Roldano Cattoni, and Marcello Federico.
2015. The iwslt 2015 evaluation campaign. In
IWSLT 2015, International Workshop on Spoken
Language Translation.

Daems, Joke, Orphée De Clercq, and Lieve Macken.
2017. Translationese and post-editese : how
comparable is comparable quality? LINGUIS-
TICA ANTVERPIENSIA NEW SERIES-THEMES IN
TRANSLATION STUDIES, 16:89–103.

Farrell, Michael. 2018. Machine Translation Markers
in Post-Edited Machine Translation Output. In Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Conference Translating and the
Computer, pages 50–59.

Fiederer, Rebecca and Sharon O’Brien. 2009. Quality
and machine translation: A realistic objective. The
Journal of Specialised Translation, 11:52–74.

Garcia, Ignacio. 2010. Is machine translation ready
yet? Target. International Journal of Translation
Studies, 22(1):7–21.

Green, Spence, Jeffrey Heer, and Christopher D Man-
ning. 2013. The efficacy of human post-editing for
language translation. Chi 2013, pages 439–448.

Guerberof, Ana. 2009. Productivity and quality in mt
post-editing. In MT Summit XII-Workshop: Beyond
Translation Memories: New Tools for Translators
MT. Citeseer.

Hassan, Hany, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal
Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark, Christian Federmann,
Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Will
Lewis, Mu Li, Shujie Liu, Tie-Yan Liu, Renqian
Luo, Arul Menezes, Tao Qin, Frank Seide, Xu Tan,
Fei Tian, Lijun Wu, Shuangzhi Wu, Yingce Xia,
Dongdong Zhang, Zhirui Zhang, and Ming Zhou.
2018. Achieving Human Parity on Automatic Chi-
nese to English News Translation. https://
arxiv.org/abs/1803.05567.

Koponen, Maarit. 2016. Is machine translation post-
editing worth the effort? A survey of research
into post-editing and effort. Journal of Specialised
Translation, 25(25):131–148.

Mauro, Cettolo, Niehues Jan, Stüker Sebastian, Ben-
tivogli Luisa, Cattoni Roldano, and Federico Mar-
cello. 2016. The iwslt 2016 evaluation campaign. In
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation.

Plitt, Mirko and François Masselot. 2010. A productiv-
ity test of statistical machine translation post-editing
in a typical localisation context. The Prague bulletin
of mathematical linguistics, 93:7–16.

Scarpa, Federica. 2006. Corpus-based quality-
assessment of specialist translation: A study using
parallel and comparable corpora in english and ital-
ian. Insights into specialized translation–linguistics
insights. Bern: Peter Lang, pages 155–172.

Stolcke, Andreas. 2002. Srilm-an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Seventh international confer-
ence on spoken language processing.

Straka, Milan and Jana Straková. 2017. Tokenizing,
pos tagging, lemmatizing and parsing ud 2.0 with
udpipe. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared
Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Univer-
sal Dependencies, pages 88–99, Vancouver, Canada,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Straka, Milan, Jan Hajic, and Jana Straková. 2016.
Udpipe: Trainable pipeline for processing conll-u
files performing tokenization, morphological analy-
sis, pos tagging and parsing. In LREC.

Toral, Antonio and Vı́ctor M. Sánchez-Cartagena.
2017. A multifaceted evaluation of neural versus
phrase-based machine translation for 9 language di-
rections. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages
1063–1073, Valencia, Spain, April. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Toral, Antonio, Sheila Castilho, Ke Hu, and Andy Way.
2018. Attaining the unattainable? reassessing claims
of human parity in neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine
Translation, Volume 1: Research Papers, pages 113–
123, Belgium, Brussels, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Toury, Gideon. 2012. Descriptive translation stud-
ies and beyond: Revised edition, volume 100. John
Benjamins Publishing.

Čulo, Oliver and Jean Nitzke. 2016. Patterns of termi-
nological variation in post-editing and of cognate use
in machine translation in contrast to human transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference
of the European Association for Machine Transla-
tion, EAMT 2017, Riga, Latvia, May 30 - June 1,
2016, pages 106–114. European Association for Ma-
chine Translation.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 1 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 281


