




































Application of Post-Edited Machine Translation  

in Fashion eCommerce 
 

Kasia Kosmaczewska 

TranslateMedia  

11 Carteret Street 

SW1H 9DJ London, UK 

<name>@translatemedia.com 

Matt Train 

TranslateMedia  

11 Carteret Street 

SW1H 9DJ London, UK 

<name>@translatemedia.com 

 

 Abstract 

Machine translation (MT) and post-edited 

machine translation (PEMT) have tradi-
tionally been explored primarily in the 

context of legal and medical content types, 

where MT results are often easier to pre-

dict due to the heavily standardised lan-
guage structure and unambiguous nature 

of terminology used. Each content type 

and domain presents its unique challenges 
to both MT systems and linguists perform-

ing the post-editing tasks. This paper de-

scribes how PEMT can be applied in the 
fashion eCommerce domain, taking a pop-

ular British fashion brand – Topshop – as 

an example. This paper aims to explore 

different aspects of delivering PEMT to a 
fashion eCommerce client, the most 

prominent being linguists’ involvement in 

machine translation-related activities, in-
cluding their key role in transitioning from 

human translation to statistical machine 

translation (SMT), and then from SMT to 
neural machine translation (NMT). The 

implications of switching from full human 

translation to PEMT for the end client and 

overall learnings made by the language 
service provider (LSP) during these tran-

sitions will be also discussed. 

1 Introduction 

With machine translation technology going 
through a period of intense development, the 

focus of the industry often shifts away from the 

                                                

 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 
CCBY-ND. 

human actors without which this technology 

would not have emerged in the first place. 

Taking Topshop as an example, this paper aims 

to analyse the role of humans involved in the 
PEMT cycle, namely: 

- the client who orders post-editing jobs; 
- linguists who handle the post-editing;  
- account managers and project managers 

who oversee the process on the LSP’s side.  

This is an attempt to describe the impact that 

the emergence of machine translation technology 
and related services such as PEMT has had on hu-

man actors in the localisation chain. 

While machine translation has undisputedly al-
lowed for more automation and increased time-ef-

ficiencies in a number of localisation scenarios, it 

is of utmost importance to evaluate how it has im-
pacted the way fashion eCommerce clients, lin-

guists and LSPs work, in order to be able to con-

tinue leveraging this technology adequately in the 

future. 

2 Specific challenges of translating for 
fashion eCommerce 

Providing translations for any domain has its own 

specific challenges that need to be effectively 

addressed. 
Fashion eCommerce is of growing importance 

to the global economy as fashion retailers have 

been quick in grasping the opportunity to grow 
their businesses internationally, increasingly via 

online channels. 

In 2012, overseas sales accounted for over 13% 

of total UK online sales. It is predicted that online 
sales from outside the UK will rise dramatically 

from circa £4bn generated in 2012 to an estimated 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 167



£28bn by 2020, accounting for around 40% of to-

tal online sales revenue.1 
When going global, fashion retailers often opt 

for localising their content, and this decision is 

supported by research by Common Sense Advi-

sory showing that consumers prefer to buy in their 
own language (Sargent, 2014). One of the most 

prominent challenges that linguists and LSPs are 

presented with when working for fashion eCom-
merce clients is correctly and accurately predict-

ing what would appeal to the target audience in 

the target market in terms of the tone of voice, vo-
cabulary and the general feel of the target lan-

guage copy, in a way that satisfies the brand man-

agers in each target location. 

Meeting these specific challenges can often 
mean the difference between the client making its 

international trading programme a success or a 

failure. If the target consumer identifies with the 
way that they are being addressed by a foreign 

fashion retailer in their native language, then they 

will be more likely to purchase goods produced by 
this retailer. On the other hand, if the consumer 

finds the style and tone of communication in their 

target language inadequate, it can damage the 

brand’s image in the target market and result in the 
brand becoming unsuccessful in that location. 

When transitioning the service provided to Top-

shop from full human translation to PEMT, it was 
of paramount importance not to lose that focus 

and for the switch between services not to have 

any detrimental effect on the tone of voice of the 

localised content. 

3 Client profile 

Topshop is a global fashion retailer with over 500 
shops in 58 countries and, at the time of writing, a 

considerable eCommerce presence. Topshop has 

been continuously proactive in communicating 

with its global consumers using highly targeted, 
localised content since taking its eCommerce 

website international in 2011.  

Given the international nature of the business, 
the brand has extensive localisation needs. To 

address these needs, the LSP has worked with 

Topshop since 2011, providing translations of 
brand messages, features, articles, blog posts and 

product descriptions. The high quality of the 

translations is of significant importance given that 

vast majority of these serve to communicate 
directly with consumers and therefore shape the 

brand perception in their minds. 

                                                
1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/284559/e-

commerce-sales-of-retailers-in-the-united-kingdom-

3.1 Topshop product descriptions 

Topshop’s largest requirement in terms of volume 
is localisation of product descriptions published 

on the transactional eCommerce website 

www.topshop.com. With dozens of new products 

being added to Topshop’s website on a daily basis 
and hundreds of others regularly requiring updates 

with new specifications, prompt turnaround times 

have been an important aspect of the localisation 
cycle for the client. 

Apart from needing to put products online as 

soon as possible, Topshop had a particular yet not 
unique concern that publishing products on differ-

ent language websites at different times would 

disappoint customers. If products become availa-

ble on the UK website first, customers from other 
countries are likely to enquire why the same goods 

are not available on the local version of the site or 

order goods to be shipped from the UK to their 
country, which creates operational issues for the 

retailer and puts a strain on its customer service 

teams. 
To respond to that urgency, since the beginning 

of the collaboration, Topshop has been using a 

custom-built integration between their eCom-

merce platform and the LSP’s translation manage-
ment system to send all products requiring trans-

lation automatically, without the client having to 

manually flag any new items for translation or 
press a button to make new and updated product 

descriptions available to the LSP for translation. 

Each product description contains between 20 

and 100 words and each one of them follows the 
same structure – it begins with a product name, 

which is no more than 100 characters long, fol-

lowed by a long description. The long description 
comprises of a specification of the product, in-

cluding washing or handling instructions and gar-

ment material composition.  
Each batch of product descriptions, containing 

between 40 and 100 items on average, is turned 

around and sent back to the client’s system within 

24 hours so that it can be promptly published on 
international sites. At the time of writing, this 

amounts to 1,332 words on average per day, in-

cluding weekends. 
 

by-foreign-and-domestic/ 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 168



 
Figure 1. An example of a Topshop product 

description in English2 

4 Switch from full human translation to 
post-edited machine translation 

Five years after Topshop started collaborating 

with the LSP, it became apparent that the transla-

tion memories had grown to over 2m words and 
the translation memory savings slowly started to 

plateau. 

Due to the nature of the content – well-struc-
tured, often repetitive product descriptions – and 

the language combination in question (English 

into German), switching the service provided 

from human translation to post-edited machine 
translation seemed the optimal way forward to 

further improve turnaround times, keep the cur-

rent quality and consistency of the translations 
and also allow for cost efficiencies on the client’s 

side. 

In 2016, the LSP decided to appoint an external 

machine translation provider to support Topshop’s 
needs. That provider built a custom statistical MT 

engine based on Moses using publicly available 

generic data as a baseline and supplementing it 
with Topshop’s translation memory and term ba-

ses. The translation memory used to train the first 

iteration of the model contained approximately 
204,641 translation units.3 

It was important for the LSP to maintain the 

positive working relationship with linguists who 

had been working on Topshop translations over 
the years. Therefore, the LSP made sure the lin-

guists played a key part in transitioning to PEMT 

                                                
2 https://www.topshop.com/en/tsuk/product/clothing-

427/hoodies-sweats-6864676/chunky-rib-cut-and-sew-
sweatshirt-8274864 
3 Since the paper is being written retrospectively and 

by involving them in planning, testing, and regu-

lar group video conferences to discuss the project. 
In the human translation workflow, there were 

two linguists involved – one translator and one re-

viser. The LSP wanted to retain the same number 

of linguists in the PEMT workflow, with the 
change that the first linguist would act as a post-

editor while the second continued as a reviser. 

This workflow was chosen in order to ensure high 
quality and consistency of the target language 

copy, especially in the period when post-editors 

were still learning how to perform post-editing 
tasks and finding the right balance between under- 

and over-editing. Another reason for keeping two 

linguists in the process was to continue providing 

a regular stream of jobs for all the linguists who 
have been involved with Topshop rather than re-

ducing the number of jobs available to each lin-

guist. This was a way for the LSP to show their 
recognition of the efforts that the linguists have 

invested in working with Topshop over the years. 

In the initial stages of working with statistical 
MT engine, the LSP had a core team of four post-

editors and one reviser working on the post-edit-

ing jobs. 

Prior to the change, the LSP’s internal Topshop 
team, comprising of an account manager and two 

project managers, was trained on machine transla-

tion technology so that they were able to better as-
sist linguists with any questions and feedback that 

could arise in relation to post-editing after the go-

live date. 

4.1 Post-editing with statistical machine 
translation 

During the first phase of implementing PEMT on 

Topshop product descriptions, which lasted 

approximately 2 years, the crucial part of the 
transition was training all involved linguists on 

how to perform post-editing, including becoming 

sensitive to the type of errors specific to machine 
translation systems (Daems, Vandepitte, 

Hartsuiker and Macken, 2017) and how to address 

them effectively. 

This meant a significant change in the way lin-
guists were used to work for this client (Doherty, 

2016). It also meant that they needed to acquire a 

new set of skills since post-editing presented them 
with different challenges in comparison to stand-

ard translation.  

the LSP did not record the exact number of translation 

units when the initial training was done, the data 

provided is an approximation. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 169



Since the post-editing effort is directly related 

to the quality of the machine translation output 
(Germann, Koehn, 2014), the SMT engine in 

question was re-trained on a monthly basis with 

corrections made by linguists during the post-

editing stage in order to make sure the quality was 
improving over time. 

The post-editing distance was measured by the 

external MT provider using the Levenshtein algo-
rithm. Levenshtein distance calculates the mini-

mum number of character edits that are necessary 

to transform one string into another string (Le-
venshtein, 1966).4 

Apart from re-training the statistical engine, in 

order to reduce the post-editing effort, post-edit-

ing rules were also used to automate repetitive 
post-edits. To create and implement these rules, 

regular qualitative feedback was provided by the 

post-editors, who were asked to report on recur-
ring issues that were not resolved by the monthly 

re-training of the engine. 

Throughout the collaboration, Topshop has 
specified a number of brand rules and require-

ments that govern the target language copy in Ger-

man, in the form of a German language style 

guide. An example of this specific requirement is 
using proper case in the line name in the German 

translation, even though it is often fully capital-

ised in the source. A real-life example of a seg-
ment pair demonstrating this requirement can be 

found below: 

 

Source: **MATERNITY Premium White Mom 
Shorts 

Target: **Weiße Premium Mom Umstandsshorts 

 
This output was achieved through post-editing 

rules when the LSP was using statistical machine 

translation. 

4.2 Post-editing with neural machine trans-
lation 

In early 2018, due to the increasing reliability of 

neural machine translation systems (Srivastava, 

Shukla, Tiwari, 2018) as well as the increased 
quality that they are able to return when compared 

to SMT systems (Volkart, Bouillon, Girletti, 

2018), the LSP decided to retire the SMT solution 
in favour of an NMT system.  

The LSP selected an external provider that 

offers a scalable adaptive neural MT solution. In 

this provider’s approach, the MT output is 
produced using baseline models trained on 

generic data but is also adapted in real time to any 

                                                
4 http://www.levenshtein.net/ 

similar content stored not only in the existing 

client-specific translation memory but also any 
similar translation memories. This approach 

eliminates the need to train one custom engine for 

each client or domain, which is very appealing to 

the LSP in terms of scalability. 
This means that MT models are much more ag-

ile and flexible – the MT output is adapted to each 

client’s specific style, tone of voice and terminol-
ogy on the fly. Corrections made by post-editors 

are sent back to the model upon completion of 

each job, which eliminates the need for any man-
ual re-training of the model.  

At that point in time, the Topshop translation 

memory contained 282,332 translation units. 

The decision to switch from SMT to NMT was 
made following a period of trials and assessments 

aiming at verifying whether NMT was going to be 

a sustainable solution to handle eCommerce 
fashion content effectively. Comparing results 

produced by SMT and NMT systems for the same 

source text is a common evaluation method 
(Calixto et al., 2017; Castilho et al., 2017). The 

LSP asked two Topshop post-editors to compare 

242 strings translated with the existing SMT 

engine and the new NMT engine. Each source 
string was 7 words long on average or 40 

characters on average, including spaces. The test 

set was representative of the live work in terms of 
content type.  

Although each linguist’s opinion on individual 

strings did not always converge, overall both lin-

guists agreed that the new NMT model returned 
better results than the old SMT model. 

In the test, 93 (38%) segments didn’t need to be 

edited when the NMT model was used while only 
33 (14%) segments didn’t need to be edited when 

the SMT model was used. These results provided 

a clear indication for the LSP that NMT was more 
adequate for the given content type and language 

combination confirmed that it was time to move 

onto NMT. 

Comparing the output from statistical and neu-
ral machine translation engines meant that lin-

guists needed to develop a new set of skills. One 

of those was sensitivity to machine translation er-
rors which were previously unknown to them, 

both when they used to provide traditional trans-

lation for Topshop and when they did post-editing 
with SMT engines. 

Furthermore, the need for creating post-editing 

rules significantly decreased when using NMT 

and the need for monthly engine re-training disap-
peared completely. As expected, in practice, the 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 170



adaptive neural machine translation framework 

proved considerably more receptive to corrections 
made by post-editors, learning immediately from 

the post-edits, leading to an increase in the num-

ber of words being post-edited per hour.  

This in turn, also meant that linguists did not 
need to report on recurring translation errors in the 

machine translation output as frequently as they 

did when they worked with SMT. This, as well as 
the quality of the machine translation improving 

over time, allowed the amount of time linguists 

spend on handling Topshop jobs to decrease. 
Linguists reported a slight drop in the accuracy 

of terminology when switching to NMT, however 

this was conveyed as qualitative feedback and not 

measured in objective terms. The post-editing ef-
fort measurements did not converge with lin-

guists’ qualitative feedback in this respect. 

 

4.3 Measuring effort involved in post-edit-
ing 

 
Using similar methods to what is described by 

Federico, Cattelan and Trombetti (2012), since the 

very beginning of delivering PEMT to Topshop, 

the LSP has been recording two indicators of the 
post-editing effort: 

 Post-editing speed – the number of words 
that the linguist is able to review and edit in an 

hour; 

 Post-editing distance – a percentage value 
indicating the extent to which the raw machine 

translation output needed to be edited by the 

post-editor in order to arrive at the desired 

quality level.  
When working with SMT, the post-editing dis-

tance was measured by the MT provider. After the 

switch to NMT, measuring the post-editing effort, 
including the implementation of the algorithm to 

calculate the effort, was passed onto the LSP.  

Since the first external MT provider the LSP 
worked with used the Levenshtein distance, this 

method has also been followed when the LSP 

started using NMT. In this way, the LSP aimed to 

ensure that productivity results from before and 
after the switch could be correctly compared. This 

measure is mostly being used to unveil trends ra-

ther than meant to be absolutely accurate. 
To convert the Levenshtein distance into a per-

centage value, the LSP uses the following for-

mula: 
 

                                                
5 All values in this section have been obtained using 

the Levenshtein algorithm. 
6 Although they can be measured in qualitative terms 

(1 – Lev(a,b) / Max(|a|, |b|)) * 100 

 
Data based on these two indicators – post-edit-

ing distance and post-editing speed – has been 

continuously accompanied with qualitative feed-

back from the linguists. The feedback has been 
collected in a number of ways, for example as a 

list of recurring issues in an online spreadsheet, 

emails, and also during conference calls between 
the LSP team and linguists. The subjective feed-

back covers all aspects of post-editing, including 

the perceived quality of the machine translation 
output, the perceived effort invested in post-edit-

ing as well as any recurring errors and terminol-

ogy problems. 

 
 

4.3.1 Post-editing effort with neural machine 
translation 

While the post-editing distance averaged at close 

to 38%5 when linguists worked with the SMT 

framework, after the switch to the NMT frame-
work, the post-editing distanced dropped dramat-

ically with almost immediate effect to 25% on av-

erage. 21.15% is currently the lowest average 

post-editing distance that has been recorded dur-
ing a one month period. 

Occasionally, particularly in jobs with low 

word count, the post-editing distance drops below 
10%, which had never been reached with SMT on 

Topshop content. 

While the number of words post-edited per 

hour averaged at 787 with SMT, it rose to 1,000 
words and above with NMT. 

5 Overall impact 

Topshop was one of the LSP’s first fashion 
eCommerce clients to have content localised 

using PEMT. Not all aspects of the impact of 

PEMT on Topshop’s product descriptions can be 

objectively or numerically measured6. For 
instance, whether there has been any emotional 

change towards working on Topshop on linguists’ 

side or client’s satisfaction with the post-edited 
machine translation in comparison to full human 

translation. Nevertheless, the impact of PEMT has 

been observed from three different perspectives – 

the linguists’ perspective, the LSP’s internal 
perspective and the end client’s perspective. 

 

 

 

by asking linguists, the client and project managers 

involved to provide an account of their perceived 

experience with PEMT. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 171



5.1 Linguists 
 
The team of linguists working on Topshop trans-

lations from English into German has not changed 

significantly since the LSP first started to work 

with the brand. 
This means that the team who had been im-

mersed in the brand tone of voice and all unique 

requirements at the beginning of cooperation and 
who used that knowledge when doing full human 

translation was also able to apply the same 

knowledge to post-editing machine translation. 
Skeptical towards machine translation at first, 

German Topshop linguists were determined to 

continue providing high quality translations to the 

end client, regardless of the service through which 
those are delivered.  

After the migration from SMT to NMT, the 

team of linguists working on Topshop shrank from 
4 to 3 post-editors and 1 reviser. This was due to 

one of the post-editors ending her career as a free-

lancer. 
Migrating to PEMT allowed linguists to acquire 

new skills and knowledge. They were thoroughly 

trained on how to effectively work with first SMT 

and then NMT technology; the knowledge and 
skills gained are easily transferable to other clients 

that those linguists work with. 

Although there are differences in the post-edit-
ing speed of individual linguists, overall all lin-

guists involved in the project work faster when 

post-editing than when translating, meaning they 

are now able to complete Topshop assignments 
quicker than they were able to translate then when 

they first started working for the brand. 

Even though some linguists were rather re-
sistant to the idea of PEMT at the start, their ded-

ication to the brand that they had worked on for 

several years helped them to eventually overcome 
the initial reservations. 

  

5.2 LSP’s internal team 
 
Applying PEMT to Topshop’s product descrip-

tions was an important opportunity for the LSP to 

verify whether this service can be relevant to fash-
ion eCommerce content in a real-life scenario. In 

that sense, the success7 of the project has led the 

LSP to offer this service to a number of other fash-
ion eCommerce clients, including some well-

known high street clothing brands. 

The Topshop example has given project manag-

ers and account managers confidence in handling 

                                                
7 Defined by client satisfaction and linguist productivity; the 

latter being directly related to machine translation quality. 

PEMT projects. Similar to linguists, the internal 

team learnt what to expect from the raw machine 
translation in the context of fashion eCommerce 

content and now understand its benefits as well as 

its limitations. 

One of the most prominent learnings on the part 
of project managers was adequately assisting lin-

guists with the post-editing task through detailed 

briefings, done in writing and on conference calls. 
This also included guiding those linguists who 

were more resistant to idea of post-editing than 

others as well as finding optimal ways of handling 
supporting tasks such as gathering linguist feed-

back. 

 

5.3  End client 

 

As a result of switching from full human transla-

tion to PEMT, the client has been able to enjoy the 
same quality of the target language copy at a re-

duced cost. 

Since the quality and consistency of the trans-
lations have been maintained, the change in ser-

vice has had no adverse effect on the brand per-

ception in the target market. 

Furthermore, it was an opportunity for Topshop 
employees responsible for ordering translations to 

also become familiar with MT technology. 

At the time of writing, the Topshop translation 
memory contained 350,776 translation units and 

continues to grow. 

6 Conclusions 

This paper aims to demonstrate that PEMT is a vi-

able service option for eCommerce fashion con-

tent intended for the German market. 
It has transpired that the success of delivering 

PEMT to Topshop largely depended on ensuring 

that linguists were well informed and engaged at 

all stages of the project – that they understood the 
task well, could rely on project managers to guide 

them when they had doubts or questions regarding 

MT, and had a streamlined way of providing feed-
back. The mutual understanding and good flow of 

communication have made it possible to effi-

ciently address any issues that arose on the client’s 
or linguists’ side in relation to PEMT.  

It appears that PEMT can indeed work well for 

fashion eCommerce content such as product de-

scriptions. Since this service allows for faster 
turnaround times, while also being available at a 

lower price point than traditional translation, it 

opens new localisation opportunities for retailers. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 172



References 

Calixto, Iacer, Daniel Stein, Evgeny Matusov, Sheila 

Castilho, Andy Way, 2017. Human Evaluation of 

Multi-modal Neural Machine Translation: a Case 

Study on E-commerce Listing Tiles. Proceedings of 

the 6th Workshop on Vision and Language. 

Valencia, Spain, 31-37. 

Castilho, Sheila, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari, 
Rico Sennrich, Vilelmini Sosoni, Yota Geor-

gakopoulou, Pintu Lohar, Andy Way, Antonio Va-

lerio, Barone Miceli Barone, Maria Gialama, 2017. 
A Comparative Quality Evaluation of PBSMT and 

NMT using Professional Translators. Proceedings 
of MT Summit XVI, vol.1: Research Track. 

Daems, Joke, Sonia Vandepitte, Robert J. Hartsuiker 
and Lieve Macken. 2017. Identifying the Machine 

Translation Error Types with the Greatest Impact 

on Post-editing Effort. Frontiers in Psychology. 

Doherty, Stephen. 2016. The Impact of Translation 

Technologies on the Process and Product of 

Translation. International Journal of 
Communication 10 (2016), University of South 

New Wales, Australia, 954. 

Federico, Marcello, Alessandro Cattelan and Marco 

Trombetti. 2012. Measuring User Productivity in 

Machine Translation Enhanced Computer Assisted 

Translation. MateCat Publications, 3. 

Germann, Ulrich, and Phillip Koehn. 2014. The Impact 

of Machine Translation Quality on Human Post-ed-

iting. Workshop on Humans and Computer-assisted 

Translation, Gothenburg, Sweden, 38–46. 

Levenshtein, Vladimir I. 1965. Binary codes capable 
of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. 

Soviet Physics Doklady 10(8), 707–710. 

 

Sargent, Benjamin B. 2014. Ten Tricks for Improving 

Global CX. Common Sense Advisory, Inc. Cam-

bridge, Massachusetts, United States of America, 1-

3. 

Srivastava, Siddhant, Anupam Shukla, Ritu Tiwari. 

2018. Machine Translation: From Statistical to 

Modern Deep-learning Practices. Computing Re-

search Repository, vol. 1812.04238.  

Volkart, Lise, Pierrette Bouillon, Sabrina Girletti. 

2018. Statistical vs. Neural Machine Translation: A 

Comparison of MTH and DeepL at Swiss Post’s 

Language. Proceedings of the 40th Conference 

Translating and the Computer. London, United-

Kingdom. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 173


