



















































Simple dynamic word embeddings for mapping perceptions in the public sphere


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Natural Language Processing and Computational Social Science, pages 94–99
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 6, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

94

Simple dynamic word embeddings for mapping perceptions in the public
sphere

Nabeel Gillani
MIT

ngillani@mit.edu

Roger Levy
MIT

rplevy@mit.edu

Abstract

Word embeddings trained on large-scale his-
torical corpora can illuminate human biases
and stereotypes that perpetuate social inequal-
ities. These embeddings are often trained in
separate vector space models defined accord-
ing to different attributes of interest. In this
paper, we develop a single, unified dynamic
embedding model that learns attribute-specific
word embeddings and apply it to a novel
dataset—talk radio shows from around the
US—to analyze perceptions about refugees.
We validate our model on a benchmark dataset
and apply it to two corpora of talk radio shows
averaging 117 million words produced over
one month across 83 stations and 64 cities.
Our findings suggest that dynamic word em-
beddings are capable of identifying nuanced
differences in public discourse about con-
tentious topics, suggesting their usefulness as
a tool for better understanding how the pub-
lic perceives and engages with different issues
across time, geography, and other dimensions.

1 Introduction

Language has long been described as both a
cause and reflection of our psycho-social con-
texts (Lewis and Lupyan, 2018). Recent work
using word embeddings—low-dimensional vec-
tor representations of words trained on large
datasets to capture key semantic information—
has demonstrated that language encodes several
gender, racial, and other common contempo-
rary biases that correlate with both implicit bi-
ases (Caliskan et al., 2017) and macro-scale his-
torical trends (Garg et al., 2018).

These studies have validated the use of word
embeddings to measure a range of psychologi-
cal and social contexts, yet in most cases, they
have failed to leverage the full power of avail-
able datasets. For example, the historical biases

presented in (Garg et al., 2018) are computed us-
ing decade-specific word embeddings produced
by training different Word2Vec (Mikolov et al.,
2013) models on a large corpus of historical text
from that decade. The authors then use a Pro-
crustes alignment to project embeddings from dif-
ferent models into the same vector space so they
can be compared across decades (Hamilton et al.,
2016). While this approach is reasonable when
there are large-scale datasets available for a given
attribute of interest (e.g. decade), it requires an
additional optimization step and also disregards
valuable training data that could be pooled and
leveraged across attribute values to help with both
training and regularization. This latter property
is particularly appealing—and necessary—in the
context of limited data.

In this paper, we use a simple, unified dynamic
word embedding model that jointly trains linguis-
tic information alongside any categorical variable
of interest—e.g. year, geography, income bracket,
etc.—that describes the context in which a particu-
lar word was used. We apply this model to a novel
data corpus—talk radio transcripts from stations
located in over 64 US cities—to explore the evo-
lution of perceptions about refugees during a one-
month period in late 2018. The results from our
model suggest the potential to use dynamic word
embeddings to obtain a granular, near real-time
pulse on how people feel about different issues in
the public sphere.

2 Model

2.1 Overview
Our dynamic embedding for word w is defined as

E(w,A) = γw + Σa∈A β
a
w (1)

where γw is an attribute-invariant embedding of w
computed across the entire corpus, βaw is the off-



95

set for w with respect to attribute a across the set
of attributes A we are interested in computing the
word embedding with respect to. For example, if
we wish to compute the embedding for the word
“refugee” as it was used on the 25th day of a par-
ticular 30-day corpus of talk radio transcripts, we
would set w = refugee and A = {25}. This ap-
proach, as formalized in Equation 1 above, is iden-
tical to one introduced by (Bamman et al., 2014),
though finer details of our model and training dif-
fer slightly, as described below.

To learn γw and βaw, we train a neural network.
Our model is a simple extension to the distributed
memory (DM) model for learning paragraph vec-
tors originally introduced in (Le and Mikolov,
2014). The DM model uses a continuous bag-of-
words architecture to jointly train a paragraph ID
with a sequence of words sampled from that para-
graph to predict a particular word given the words
that surround it. The output of this model includes
a semantic vector representation of a) each para-
graph, and b) each word in the vocabulary.

Our model extends the DM model by adding
an additional dimension to the paragraph vec-
tor to learn specific paragraph-by-word—or, in
our context, attribute-by-word—embeddings (i.e.,
βaw). The penultimate layer (before word predic-
tion) is computed as an average of the dynamic
embeddings for each context word, i.e., X =
1
N Σ

N
i=1E(wi, S,A), where N is the size of our

context window. This average embedding is then
multiplied by the output layer parameters and fed
through the final layer for word prediction. Figure
1 depicts our model architecture.

2.2 Implementation

We build on an existing PyTorch implementation
of paragraph vectors1 to implement our model,
setting the dimensionality of γw and βaw to be 100.
We use the Adam optimization algorithm with a
batch size of 128, word context window size of
8 (sampling four words to the left and right of
a target prediction word), learning rate of 0.001,
and L2 penalty to regularize all model parameters.
We only train embeddings for words that occur
at least 10 times in the corpus. For training, we
use the negative sampling loss function, described
in (Mikolov et al., 2013) to be much more efficient
than the hierarchical softmax and yield competi-

1Available at: https://github.com/inejc/
paragraph-vectors.

Figure 1: Our dynamic embedding model learns an at-
tribute invariant embedding for each training word w
(i.e., γw), along with an attribute-specific offset for at-
tribute A = {a1} (i.e., βa1w ). The γw and βa1w terms
are summed to computeE(w,A) for each context word
and averaged across words before classification. Figure
inspired by (Le and Mikolov, 2014).

tive results2. We train for 1 to 3 epochs and select
the model with the lowest loss.

2.3 Validation

To validate our model, we compare our results to
those produced via the decade-by-decade models
trained in (Garg et al., 2018) using the Corpus of
Historical American English (Davies, 2010). We
use the same metric and word lists as the authors
to compute bias scores. In particular, we com-
pute linguistic bias scores for two analyses pre-
sented in (Garg et al., 2018): the extent to which
female versus male words are semantically simi-
lar to occupation-related words, and the extent to
which Asian vs. White last names are semanti-
cally similar to the same, from 1910 through 1990.
We then compute correlations between changes
in these scores and the actual changes in female
and Asian workforce participation rates (relative
to men and Whites, respectively) over the same
time period.

Figure 2 depicts these results. The correlation
between our scores and changes in workforce par-
ticipation rates are similar to the correlation be-
tween the scores from (Garg et al., 2018) and the
same (r = 0.8, p = 0.01 and r = 0.81, p <
0.01, respectively, for gender occupation bias; r =
0.84, p < 0.01 and r = 0.79, p = 0.01, respec-
tively, for Asian/White occupation bias). Qualita-
tive inspection of Figure 2 suggests that our model
also produces smoother decade-by-decade scores,
suggesting that it not only identifies attribute-

2We include three noise words when computing the loss.

https://github.com/inejc/paragraph-vectors
https://github.com/inejc/paragraph-vectors


96

Figure 2: Scores produced by (Garg et al., 2018) and
our model (blue dotted and green dashed lines, respec-
tively) compared to actual workforce participation rates
(solid lines) for gender (top) and Asian/White (bottom)
linguistic biases. To compare all values on a single y-
axis, we standardize both sets of bias scores and work-
force participation rates by subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation across decades.

specific fluctuations in word semantics, but also,
may provide a more general, regularized model for
learning attribute-conditioned word embeddings.
Future research should include a comparison of
our model’s outputs to the outputs of other dy-
namic word embedding models that treat time as
a continuously-valued attribute, e.g. (Bamler and
Mandt, 2017; Rudolph and Blei, 2018; Yao et al.,
2018).

3 Case study: refugee bias on talk radio

We are interested in applying our dynamic embed-
ding model to better-understand talk radio-show
biases towards refugees. Talk radio is a significant
source of news for a large fraction of Americans:
In 2017, over 90% of Americans over the age of 12
listened to some type of broadcast radio during the
course of a given week, with news/talk radio serv-
ing as one of the most popular types (Pew, 2018).
With listener call-ins and live dialog, talk ra-
dio provides an interesting source of information,
commentary, and discussion that distinguishes it
from discourse found in both print and social me-
dia. Given the proliferation of refugees and dis-

placed peoples in recent years (totalling nearly 66
million individuals in 2016 (UNHCR, 2017))—
coupled with the rise of talk radio as a particularly
popular media channel for conservative political
discourse (Mort, 2012)—analyzing bias towards
refugees across talk radio stations may provide a
unique window into a large portion of the Ameri-
can population’s views on the issue.

3.1 Dataset and analyses
Our data is sourced from talk radio audio data col-
lected by the media analytics nonprofit Cortico3.
Audio data is ingested from nearly 170 differ-
ent radio stations and automatically transcribed to
text. The data is further processed to identify dif-
ferent speaker turns into “snippets”; infer the gen-
der of the speaker; and compute other useful met-
rics (more details on the radio data pipeline can be
found in (Beeferman and Roy, 2018)).

We train our dynamic embedding model on two
talk radio datasets sourced from 83 stations lo-
cated in 64 cities across the US. Dataset 1 includes
4.4 million snippets comprised of 114 million
words produced by 390 shows between September
1 and 30, 2018. Dataset 2 includes over 4.8 mil-
lion snippets comprised of 119 million total words
produced by 433 shows between August 15, and
September 15, 20184. These datasets are used for
analyses 1 and 2, respectively, described below.

Finally, we define bias towards refugees simi-
lar to how the authors of (Garg et al., 2018) define
bias against Asians during the 20th century, mea-
suring to what extent radio shows associate “out-
sider” adjectives like “aggressive”, “frightening”,
“illegal”, etc. with refugee and immigrant-related
terms in comparison to all other adjectives. To
compute refugee bias scores with respect to the
attribute set A, we use the relative norm distance
metric from (Garg et al., 2018):

biasA = Σr∈R||E(r,A)−all||2−||E(r,A)−out||2

Where E(r,A) is the dynamic embedding for a
given word refugee word r in the set of all refugee-
related words R (e.g. “refugee”, ”immigrant”,
”asylum”, etc); all is the average dynamic embed-
ding computed for each w in the set of all adjec-
tives with respect to A; out is analogously defined
for outsider adjectives; and || · ||2 is the L2 norm.

3http://cortico.ai.
4As a rough proxy for removing syndicated content, we

include only those snippets produced by a talk radio shows
that air on one station.

http://cortico.ai


97

Figure 3: Bias towards refugees as outsiders across talk radio shows from mid-August to mid-September 2018: (a)
depicts bias scores computed using a “non-dynamic model”, i.e., training multiple Word2Vec models (one per day
of data) and then projecting these models into the same vector space using orthogonal Procrustes alignment, and (b)
depicts bias scores computed using our dynamic model. From qualitative inspection, the dynamic model appears
to regularize scores across days during which refugee-related news is likely less-salient in public discourse.

Figure 4: Bias towards refugees as outsiders computed
across cities for radio shows aired between September
1 and 30, 2018 (darker means more biased).

3.2 Analysis 1: refugee bias over time
We analyze how refugee biases on talk radio vary
by day between August 15 and September 15,
2018. We choose this interval to center on the
August 31, 2018 news story regarding the Trump
administration’s contentious decision to pull fund-
ing from a UN agency that supports Palestinian
refugees5. Our attribute of interest is the day in
which a particular snippet occurred. Figure 3(b)
illustrates the temporal variation in bias scores,
highlighting a notable shift towards greater bias
against refugees in response to the news story. In-
terestingly, bias towards refugees returns to pre-
event levels very quickly after the spike. Comput-
ing the correlation between daily bias scores and

5For historical coverage of different refugee-
related news events, please see https:
//www.nytimes.com/topic/subject/
refugees-and-displaced-people.

the number of mentions of the keyword “refugee”
across stations yields r = 0.56, p < 0.001, sug-
gesting that additional discourse about refugees
tends to be biased against them.

As a comparison, we also compute bias scores
by training one Word2Vec model per day and pro-
jecting all day-by-day models into the same vec-
tor space using orthogonal Procrustes alignment6

similar to (Hamilton et al., 2016). The resulting
scores from this non-dynamic model are depicted
in 3(a). From qualitative inspection, the day-by-
day scores produced by the non-dynamic model
appear much less smooth, and hence, fail to show
the relative shift in discourse that likely occurred
in response to a major refugee-related news event.
One possible reason for this is that the median
number of words for each day in the talk radio
corpus is 4 million—over 5x fewer than a me-
dian of 22 million words per decade used to train
each decade-specific model in (Garg et al., 2018).
These results suggest that using our dynamic em-
bedding approach is particularly valuable when
data is sparse for any given attribute.

3.3 Analysis 2: refugee bias by city

Next, we analyze how bias towards refugees varies
by city for talk radio produced between Septem-
ber 1 and 30, 2018. We first train our model
to learn a city-specific embedding for each word

6We use the Gensim implementations of Word2Vec and
orthogonal Procrustes alignment, aligning hyperparameters
as closely as possible to our dynamic model.

https://www.nytimes.com/topic/subject/refugees-and-displaced-people
https://www.nytimes.com/topic/subject/refugees-and-displaced-people
https://www.nytimes.com/topic/subject/refugees-and-displaced-people


98

and then use these embeddings to compute corre-
sponding bias scores, which are depicted in fig-
ure 4. Qualitatively, cities in the Southeastern US,
those closer to the US-Mexico border, and some
that have suffered from economic decline in recent
years (e.g. Detroit, MI; Youngstown, OH) tend to
have talk radio coverage that is more biased to-
wards refugees, though the trends are quite var-
ied. Interestingly, there is a weak negative, though
marginally insignificant, correlation between the
level of bias per city and the number of refugees
the city admitted in 20177 (r = −0.21, p = 0.1).
This relationship persists even after controlling
for state fixed effects. A more thorough analysis
with additional cities and other city-level covari-
ates may reveal meaningful patterns and perhaps
even help illuminate which geographies are par-
ticularly welcoming towards refugees.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we present a unified dynamic
word embedding model mirroring the earlier work
of (Bamman et al., 2014) to learn attribute-specific
embeddings. We validated our model by repli-
cating gender and ethnic stereotypes produced
in (Garg et al., 2018) by training multiple word
embedding models and applied it to a novel cor-
pus of talk radio data to analyze how perceptions
of refugees as “outsiders” vary by geography and
over time. Our results illustrate that dynamic word
embeddings capture salient shifts in public dis-
course around specific topics, suggesting their po-
tential usefulness as a tool for obtaining a granu-
lar understanding of how the media and members
of the public perceive different issues, especially
when data is sparse.

Opportunities for future work include a) com-
paring the results of our model to other existing
dynamic embedding models, particularly when the
attribute of interest is temporal in nature, b) ex-
ploring embeddings defined with respect to other
attributes of interest, perhaps in combination with
other contextual embedding models like (Peters
et al., 2018), c) exploring alternative definitions
of bias towards refugees and other groups, and d)
learning a dynamic embedding model for contin-
uous attributes in order to limit the need to im-
pose (perhaps arbitrary) discretizations. We be-

7We sourced per-city 2017 refugee arrival numbers from
the Refugee Processing Center’s interactive reporting web-
page: http://ireports.wrapsnet.org/.

lieve these approaches hold promise in helping us
illuminate evolving attitudes and perceptions to-
wards different issues and groups across a rapidly
expanding digital public sphere.

Acknowledgments

We thank Doug Beeferman, Prashanth Vija-
yaraghavan and David McClure for their valuable
input on this project. We also thank Nikhil Garg
for sharing prior results to help us benchmark our
model.

References
R. Bamler and S. Mandt. 2017. Dynamic Word Em-

beddings. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML).

D. Bamman, C. Dyer, and N. A. Smith. 2014. Dis-
tributed Representations of Geographically Situated
Language. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers).

D. Beeferman and B. Roy. 2018. Making radio search-
able. https://medium.com/cortico/
making-radio-searchable-f337de9fa325.
Accessed: March 10, 2019.

A. Caliskan, J. J. Bryson, and A. Narayanan.
2017. Semantics derived automatically from lan-
guage corpora contain human-like biases. Science,
356(6334):183–186.

M Davies. 2010. The 400 million word corpus of his-
torical American English (1810 2009). In Selected
Papers from the Sixteenth International Conference
on English Historical Linguistics (ICEHL 16).

N. Garg, L. Schiebinger, D. Jurafsky, and J. Zhou.
2018. Word embeddings quantify 100 years of gen-
der and ethnic stereotypes. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 115(16):E3635–E3644.

W. Hamilton, J. Leskovec, and D. Jurafsky. 2016. Di-
achronic word embeddings reveal statistical laws of
semantic change. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1489–
1501.

Q.V. Le and T. Mikolov. 2014. Distributed Repre-
sentations of Sentences and Documents. arXiv:
1405.4053.

M. Lewis and G. Lupyan. 2018. Language use shapes
cultural norms: Large scale evidence from gender.
In The Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science So-
ciety, pages 2041–2046.

T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and
J. Dean. 2013. Distributed representations of words
and phrases and their compositionality. NIPS.

http://ireports.wrapsnet.org/
https://medium.com/cortico/making-radio-searchable-f337de9fa325
https://medium.com/cortico/making-radio-searchable-f337de9fa325


99

S. Mort. 2012. Tailoring Dissent on the Airwaves:
The Role of Conservative Talk Radio in the Right-
Wing Resurgence of 2010. New Political Science,
34(4):485–505.

M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gard-
ner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer. 2018.
Deep contextualized word representations. arXiv:
1802.05365.

Pew. 2018. Audio and podcasting fact
sheet. http://www.journalism.org/
fact-sheet/audio-and-podcasting/.
Accessed: March 10, 2019.

M. Rudolph and D. Blei. 2018. Dynamic Embeddings
for Language Evolution. In WWW 2018: The 2018
Web Conference, pages 1003–1011.

UNHCR. 2017. Forced displacement in 2016. Global
Trends Report.

Z. Yao, Y. Sun, W. Ding, N. Rao, and H. Xiong. 2018.
Dynamic Word Embeddings for Evolving Semantic
Discovery. In Proceedings of the The Eleventh ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining (WSDM).

http://www.journalism.org/fact-sheet/audio-and-podcasting/
http://www.journalism.org/fact-sheet/audio-and-podcasting/

