




































Translating Terminologies: A Comparative Examination of
NMT and PBSMT Systems

Long-Huei Chen
The University of Tokyo

Tokyo, Japan
longhuei@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Kyo Kageura
The University of Tokyo

Tokyo, Japan
kyo@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Terminology translation is a critical aspect
in translation quality assurance, as it re-
quires exact forms not typically expected
of conventional translation. Recent stud-
ies have examined the quality of machine
translation, but little work has focused
specifically on the translation of terms. We
present a comparative evaluation of the
success of NMT and PBSMT systems in
term translation. We selected eight lan-
guage pairs among English, French, Ger-
man, Finnish, and Romanian, taking into
account their diverse language families and
resource abundance. Based on the eval-
uation of Exact Match (EM) and recall
scores, we concluded that NMT, in gen-
eral, performs better with context, but PB-
SMT outperforms when translating with-
out context, and found that significant dif-
ferences often arise from language nature.

1 Introduction

Term translation is an important facet of transla-
tion quality assurance. Since terminologies are es-
sential for communication among domain experts,
term forms need to be consistent and context-
independent to maintain the integrity of the un-
derlying conceptual system during knowledge ex-
change (Sager, 1990). As such, term banks (col-
lections of cross-lingual, cross-domain terminolo-
gies) ensure correct term usage across languages in
the translation pipeline of humans.

The rise of machine learning in recent years has,
for better or for worse, changed the landscape of

c○ 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

translation forever. The typical evaluation of ma-
chine translation, due to a requirement of fast, au-
tomatic metrics during the training phase, typi-
cally involves the comparison with a set of human
translation in what is calculated as the BLEU or
the NIST scores of the translation (Papineni et al.,
2002; Doddington, 2002). These approaches run
counter to widely accepted frameworks of transla-
tion quality assurance (Görög, 2014; Peter et al.,
2016) as the measures do not single out aspects of
translation that humans traditionally attach impor-
tance.

Machine translation in general does not produce
the exactness in forms required in term translation.
Unlike translation of a text, where target text simi-
lar in meanings are equivalent as long as they ful-
fill the required functions, translated term forms
must adhere to term banks (Kageura and Marsh-
man, 2019). Machine translation also has impli-
cations in terminology building during the human
translation process, as it can provide an automatic
way to generate and validate the terminology re-
source that is available to translators (House, 2014;
Chiocchetti and Lusicky, 2017; Yamada and On-
ishi, 2019). This is why we are also interested in
learning how well the machine translation systems
perform in term translation without context (Matis,
2010).

Here we present a comparative evaluation in the
effectiveness of machine translation for terminol-
ogy transfer across multiple languages. We inves-
tigate language pairs of varying training resource
abundance on different machine translation archi-
tecture to understand the underlying factors of the
effectiveness of terminology translation. We test
systems with bidirectional translations and vali-
date the terminology equivalence by referring to
an established term bank.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 101



2 Related Work

The Special Case for Terminology Translation
Traditional translators often approach terminol-
ogy translation within the lenses of semasiologi-
cal assumptions and treat terminology as a type
of lexical elements (Achkasov, 2014). Neverthe-
less, when we take on an onomasiological point
of view and understand that terms (Adamska-
Salaciak, 2010; Lyding et al., 2006) are essentially
definitions of concepts, then the degrees of equiv-
alence are expected to be higher.

A key aspect of terminology translation is that
the formation of a term in some language/domain
is not solely at the discretion of the translator, but
has structural, pragmatic, functional, and stylis-
tic aspects that need to be taken into account
(Achkasov, 2014). This produces a need for trans-
lation of terminologies that takes into account the
domain terminology that is in existence (Kageura,
2012; Leitchik and Shelov, 2007)

Terminology in Translation Quality Assurance
Accuracy of terminologies in translated work is an
essential element in translation quality assessment
(Arango-Keeth and Koby, 2003; Görög, 2014; Pe-
ter et al., 2016). According to the standards es-
tablishing the essentiality of special treatments of
terminology translation (ISO, 2010), policies re-
lating to the adaptation of terminologies in transla-
tion work is necessitated and needs to be widely
implemented. Substantial efforts have been ex-
pended in the past to evaluate the state of termi-
nology translation in both phrase-based statistical
machine translation (PBSMT) and more recently
neural machine translation (NMT).

Yin et al. (2013) investigated consistency of ter-
minology translation by cross-referencing patent
documents in English and Chinese. Vintar (2018)
evaluated both PBSMT and NMT between English
and Slovene, a relatively lower-resource language
pair. She concluded that thought Google’s NMT
serves a large amount of user-generated content at
a large scale, the accuracy of its terminology trans-
lation within text leaves something to be desired.

Empirical Evaluation of NMT/SMT with
Textual Corpora
Several studies examined the effectiveness of neu-
ral machine translation and statistical machine
translation when applied to general text. Wu et
al. in their original paper describing Google’s

NMT system (2016) observed increased perfor-
mance compared to their previous public PBSMT
system. Shterionov et al. (2017) conducted a
comprehensive study on text translation and found
NMT improved performances in multiple metrics
as evaluated by humans. Dowling et al. (2018)
tested both NMT and SMT systems on a lower-
resourced language that is Irish and found that a
domain-specific SMT system in some cases out-
perform NMT.

Muzaffar and Behera (2018), on the other hand,
examined translation results in English-Urdu, a
relatively resource-poor language pair, and con-
cluded that NMT brings forward better compre-
hensibility and grammaticality. Castilho et al.
(2017) recruited professional translators and found
that as a tool for translators, NMT results do not re-
duce post-editing time compared to PBSMT. Work
on specific genre includes (Toral and Way, 2018),
which examine NMT vs. PBSMT performances
on literary work, and found that NMT significantly
increased the readability of the text for human
readers. Kinoshita et al. (2017) examined the use
of NMT and SMT in the translation of patent docu-
ments and concluded that NMT is superior in terms
of human evaluations.

3 Machine Translation Models

3.1 Neural Machine Translation (NMT)
3.1.1 The Encoder-decoder Architecture

The basic structure of the modern neural ma-
chine translation system involves the encoding of
a series of source text tokens, which can be words
or sub-word unit encoding, into a hidden state rep-
resentation (Cho et al., 2014).

𝑧 = ENCODE(𝑤𝑠)

𝑤𝑡|𝑤𝑠 ∼ DECODE(𝑧)
where 𝑧 is the learned hidden state, 𝑤 refers to
the distributional representation of words, with the
suffix 𝑠 or 𝑡 referring to source or target origin.
In the simplest sequence-to-sequence architecture,
the encoder hidden state came is learned from the
long short-term memory (LSTM) unit applied on
the source sentence words (Sutskever et al., 2014).

The encoder hidden state is then passed along
to the decoder, which is then passed along to the
decoder for output. The decoder generates the tar-
get sentence token-by-token while continuous up-
dating its internal state. In addition, neural atten-

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 102



tion mechanisms encourage compositional decod-
ing by taking into account the context in the de-
coder. At each step in the decoding, an attentional
score is calculated from the decoding hidden state
along with the encoding sentence tokens.

3.1.2 Zero-shot Translation
As Google’s Neural Machine Translation sys-

tem takes input from any training pairs across
all languages (Johnson et al., 2017), cross-lingual
transfer learning was made possible with the ad-
dition of a language-specific token designating the
output languages. The same shared parameters are
applied to allow for translation into any target lan-
guages. As a result, even when parallel data are
lacking across specific language pairs, resulting in
the so-called zero-shot translation, which is impos-
sible in previous systems. This allows the highly-
effective use and wide coverage of Google’s sys-
tems, even in cases where parallel corporal re-
sources are lacking for specific language pairs.

3.2 Phrase-Based Statistical Machine
Translation (PBSMT)

Statistical machine translation models statistically
enumerating and maximizing the adequacy and
fluency of the target translation by maximizing the
probability across all possible assignments, usu-
ally with the expectation-maximization (EM) al-
gorithm. Phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion (PBSMT) extends this approach to account for
the fact that phrases often form the smallest unit of
translation, and allows for phrase-level alignments
to suggest the most likable translation.

4 Approach

We conduct our experiment by pairing a term bank,
which are sources of cross-lingual translations of
specialized terms, with a set of technical docu-
ments in which the translators are expected to ad-
here to the term source. We extract sentence pairs
from the documents by searching for a context
where the term appears in accordance with the
term bank.

4.1 Data Source
The Inter-Active Terminology for Europe
(IATE) (Johnson and Macphail, 2000) is the offi-
cial term bank sanctioned by the European Union
(EU). It is the go-to source with approximately
1.4 million multilingual entries of terminologies
containing the cross-lingual translation of terms

Source Target Sentence Pairs
English French 58362
French English 53470
English German 38879
German English 38879
English Finnish 30994
Finnish English 17486
English Romanian 7676

Romanian English 5151

Table 1: Size of the source-term sentence pairs, where only
the source sentence is validated to contain the source term
while the target term may or may not contain the target term.

Source/Target Sentence Pairs
English-French 21057
English-German 14070
English-Finnish 17486

English-Romanian 2685

Table 2: Size of the human-validated sentence pairs, where
the sentence pair is validated such that both source/target sen-
tences contain the source/target term translation.

for translators working with the official European
Union languages. The European Parliament
Proceedings (EuroParl) parallel corpus is
extracted from the proceedings of the European
Parliament and includes versions in 24 European
languages (Koehn, 2005). Size of the parallel
corpora differs across language pairs, ranging
from 400,000 to around 2.2 million sentence pairs.

Since IATE is the official EU-wide terminol-
ogy as maintained and consulted by the transla-
tors under EU’s employment, the combination of
the two reflects the typical translation procedure
when a commonly-agreed term source is provided
for translators.

4.2 Language Pairs and Data Size
We choose to investigate four language pairs of the
EuroParl parallel corpus, namely English-French
(en-fr), English-German (en-de), English-Finnish
(en-fi) and English-Romanian (en-ro). The lan-
guages are chosen by taking into account language
families and data sizes.

1. Source-term sentence pairs are extracted
from the corpora, and the source sentence is
guaranteed to contain the source term, but the
human-translated target sentence may or may
not contain the target term. (Table 1)

2. Human-validated term sentence pairs are

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 103



those where both the source and the target
sentences contain the source/target term from
the terminology. They can be regarded as
cases that the context of the sentences is guar-
anteed to reflect the definition of the terminol-
ogy (Table 2)

We consider the second dataset as an equivalent
operation when the human-translator chose the ex-
act term translation as it appears in the term bank.
This replaces the needs for human terminologists
manually annotating the dataset, as the term bank
has already been validated.

4.3 Google Cloud Translation APIs

The Google Cloud Translation API provides a
programmatic interface for translating sentences
across the supported languages using state-of-the-
art translation models. The APIs include two mod-
els, the “nmt” model which is their new NMT
model, and a “base” model, which as stated is a
PBSMT model. We query the APIs to apply the
model as needed.

4.4 Evaluation: Exact Match (EM) and
Recall Scores

We compare term occurrence in results coming
from target text produced from Google’s Trans-
lation APIs and those from the official, human-
translated target text. We presume that in cases
where the term bank entry is present in the human-
translated or machine-translated sentences, the
term use in these cases are validated and consid-
ered correct usage.

Rather than using traditional measures of trans-
lation quality, in this work, we are mainly con-
cerned with the success of different systems in
their adequate reproduction of the relevant termi-
nologies in the target text. Specifically:

1. Exact Match (EM) scores is defined as the
exact occurrence of the ground truth target
terms in the translated target sentence.

2. Recall is defined as the fraction of known tar-
get term words that occur in the target text.

For our evaluation, we do not make a distinction
between the infections of terms. We chose this
strict interpretation of exact match as we want
to see how well these machine translation sys-
tems can fare in creating terminology resources for

translators without context, in which case the ex-
act form (including inflections) must be properly
transferred across language barriers. The same
scheme is also applied for with context translation

We recognize that, since both MT systems and
human translation do not include an annotation as
to the exact location of the term translation in the
sentence, we are unable to verify the precision of
the term translation or the F1 score. Also, we ar-
gue that since terms, unlike most multi-worded ex-
pressions, are technical in nature and have specific
forms, it is less likely to occur by random in the
target sentence and not as a translation, justifying
our automated approach to evaluation.

5 Experiments

5.1 Adherence to Term Banks: Human v.
NMT

In the first experiment, we apply translation sys-
tems to the source-term sentence pairs as detailed
in §4.2. We compare performances of the system
with the human translated sentences on how much
the term bank target term is correctly translated in
the target sentence. Results are given in Figure 1.

Cases in which the NMT scores are higher than
that of human translations should not be inter-
preted as NMT performing better, but that the
NMT systems adhere more to the term bank in a
rote way. Humans may make the call on whether
the particular term entry is applicable, or choose to
use pronouns to avoid repetition of terms, and our
evaluation may exclude the term variation deemed
acceptable by humans.

∙ Despite varying human performances, NMT
surpasses human scores for some language
pairs but performs worse than human in oth-
ers. This reflects the discongruity in a single
end-to-end language model in its treatment of
language pairs (§3.1.2).

∙ We observe that languages where parallel cor-
pora resources are plentiful achieve lower
NMT scores compared to the human scores.
This suggests more parallel training data may
shift the model’s focus to language model-
ing and fluency rather than simple phrase-
level correspondence, and indirectly hurt per-
formance (§3.1).

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 104



en-fr fr-en en-de de-en en-fi fi-en en-ro ro-en
Language pairs

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
EM

NMT
Human

(a) EM scores

en-fr fr-en en-de de-en en-fi fi-en en-ro ro-en
Language pairs

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Re
ca

ll

NMT
Human

(b) Recall scores

Figure 1: Comparing human performances with NMT, using
datasets where only the source sentence with context is vali-
dated to contain the source term. We test the recall and EM
scores with regards to the term bank translation and the target
sentence.

5.2 Translating Term with and without
Context: NMT v. PBSMT

In these experiments, we apply the human-
validated sentence pairs to the MT systems; this
set includes both source/target terms in their
source/target sentences, so the terms are human-
validated to reflect the context.

For resulting scores in Figure 2a and 2c, we
translate the terms along with the context sen-
tences and observe how well the translated sen-
tences adhere to the term bank translations. In Fig-
ure 2b and 2d, we see results when we translate the
terms only without the context in which the term
occur.

∙ Two obvious outliers are cases when translat-
ing English to German or Finnish. German
and Finnish both have a significant amount of
compound words, which has proven to be dif-

ficult to translate or rather for language pro-
cessing in general (Eckman, 1981; Selmer
and Lauring, 2015), and the system is ex-
pected to translate phrases (in English) to
compounds.

∙ In general, Google’s SMT systems outper-
form NMT when we translate term with con-
text; but NMT performs slightly better in
many cases across languages when we trans-
late term without context. This reflects a fun-
damental difference in the translation mech-
anisms: in that the NMT end-to-end model
pushes the model to translate the sentences
holistically, whereas PBSMT systems can
handle terms as phrasal units (§3.2).

∙ Differences in performance among languages
are less prominent when we translate without
context. This suggests the increased perfor-
mances among some languages are a result of
the language modeling available to the trans-
lation system (§3.1.1).

We also conducted a brief analysis of some of
the errors we see with regards to term length (num-
ber of words) across languages but did not observe
significant differences in scores.

5.3 Qualitative Analysis

We do a brief glance at the errors and observe hu-
man translation and NMT/SMT among language
pairs and directionality.

∙ For cases where the target language is not En-
glish, we observe that NMT are more guilty
of paraphrasing not allowed in term transla-
tion, like translating “réguler le marché” in-
stead of the correct “réglementer le marché.”
For English as the target language translation,
NMT and SMT both suffer from minor dif-
ferences that do not affect meaning, suggest-
ing that the English language models are of
higher quality.

∙ English-to-Finnish translation is an outlier in
that NMT outperforms SMT when translat-
ing with or without context. We conclude
that NMT is better at handling compound
words such as “lisäsuojatodistuksen”, which
is translated from the English multi-word
term “supplementary protection certificate.”

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 105



en-fr fr-en en-de de-en en-fi fi-en en-ro ro-en
Language pairs

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
EM

NMT
SMT

(a) EM scores, translation with context

en-fr fr-en en-de de-en en-fi fi-en en-ro ro-en
Language pairs

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

EM

NMT
SMT

(b) EM scores, translation without context

en-fr fr-en en-de de-en en-fi fi-en en-ro ro-en
Language pairs

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Re
ca

ll

(c) Recall scores, translation without context

en-fr fr-en en-de de-en en-fi fi-en en-ro ro-en
Language pairs

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Re
ca

ll

(d) Recall scores, translation without context

Figure 2: For the set of sentence pairs where both source and target sentences are validated to contain the source/target term
entries as defined in the term bank, we compare scores for NMT v. SMT systems, applying translation either with context or
only the source term itself as input.

∙ For English-Romanian, a lower-resource lan-
guage pair, we see that NMT is slightly
worse-off with or without context. An
example of the errors made is translating
“self-determination” as “auto-determinarea
popoarelor” instead of “autodeterminare a
popoarelor”, which is a minor language er-
ror unrelated to meaning. We surmise this
reflects the zero-shot approach (§3.1.2) in
Google’s NMT deemphasizes the nuances of
translating resource-poor language pairs.

6 Conclusion

We reach conclusions on NMT/SMT systems com-
pared with human translations that have implica-
tions in addition to term validation in translation
assurances. Our experiments on translating terms
without context show that such MT systems can be
useful for the term resource construction process,
and can assist translation companies in their work

on consolidating terminologies for translators’ ref-
erencing purposes.

In the future, we plan to better validate the
document-level consistency of terminologies, an-
other key aspect in quality assurance of transla-
tion. Specifically, due to the nature of the data
applied in this study, we are unable to validate if
the terms are consistently translated into a single
form throughout the whole document. Also, due
to our use of publicly-facing commercial MT APIs
for our translation models, we have limited insight
(based on published work and general knowledge
of models) to the inner workings of the systems,
and are unable to completely grasp the nature of
the training data used by Google in development.
This is a trade-off we had to face (as training our
own models would be less similar to real-world us-
age and the model cannot be as extensive due to
difficulty in acquiring data), but future work can
be based on a balance of both approaches.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 106



Acknowledgement

This work was partially supported by JSPS KAK-
ENHI Grant Number 19H05660.

References
Achkasov, Andrei V. 2014. What translators do to ter-

minology: Prescriptions vs. performance. Journal
of Siberian Federal University. Humanities & Social
Sciences, 2:210–221.

Adamska-Salaciak, A. 2010. Examining equivalence.
International Journal of Lexicography, 23:387–409.

Arango-Keeth, Fanny and Geoffrey S Koby. 2003.
Translator training evaluation and the needs of in-
dustry quality assessment. In Baer, Brian James and
Geoffrey S. Koby, editors, Beyond the Ivory Tower:
Rethinking Translation Pedagogy, pages 117–134.

Chiocchetti, Elena and Vesna Lusicky. 2017. Qual-
ity assurance in multilingual legal terminological
databases. The Journal of Specialised Translation,
27:164–188.

Cho, Kyunghyun, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using rnn encoder–decoder
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1724–1734.

Doddington, George. 2002. Automatic evaluation
of machine translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the sec-
ond international conference on Human Language
Technology Research, pages 138–145. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.

Eckman, Fred R. 1981. On predicting phonological
difficulty in second language acquisition. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 4(1):18–30.

Görög, Attila. 2014. Quantifying and benchmarking
quality: the taus dynamic quality framework. Trad-
umàtica, (12):0443–454.

House, Juliane. 2014. Translation quality assessment:
Past and present. In Translation: A multidisciplinary
approach, pages 241–264. Springer.

2010. Iso 29383:2010: Terminology policies – devel-
opment and implementation. Standard, International
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH.

Johnson, Ian and Alastair Macphail. 2000. IATE–
Inter-Agency Terminology Exchange: Development
of a single central terminology database for the insti-
tutions and agencies of the european union. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Terminology resources
and computation, LREC 2000 Conference.

Johnson, Melvin, Mike Schuster, Quoc V Le, Maxim
Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat,
Fernanda Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado,
et al. 2017. Google’s multilingual neural machine
translation system: Enabling zero-shot translation.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 5:339–351.

Kageura, Kyo and Elizabeth Marshman. 2019. Trans-
lator training evaluation and the needs of industry
quality assessment. In O’Hagan, Minako, editor,
The Routledge Handbook of Translation and Tech-
nology, pages 236–331.

Kageura, Kyo. 2012. The quantitative analysis of the
dynamics and structure of terminologies, volume 15.
John Benjamins Publishing.

Koehn, Philipp. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In MT summit, vol-
ume 5, pages 79–86.

Leitchik, Vladimir M and Serguey D Shelov. 2007.
Commensurability of scientific theories and indeter-
minacy of terminological concepts. Indeterminacy
in terminology and LSP: Studies in honour of Herib-
ert Picht/Ed. by BE Antia. Amsterdam: John Ben-
jamin’s Publishing House, pages 93–106.

Lyding, Verena, Elena Chiocchetti, Gilles Sérasset, and
Francis Brunet-Manquat. 2006. The lexalp infor-
mation system: Term bank and corpus for multilin-
gual legal terminology consolidated. In Proceedings
of the workshop on multilingual language resources
and interoperability, pages 25–31. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Matis, Nancy. 2010. Terminology management during
translation projects: Professional testimony. Lingua-
Culture, 1:107–116.

Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Peter, Jan-Thorsten, Tamer Alkhouli, Hermann Ney,
Matthias Huck, Fabienne Braune, Alexander Fraser,
Aleš Tamchyna, Ondřej Bojar, Barry Haddow, Rico
Sennrich, et al. 2016. The qt21/himl combined
machine translation system. In Proceedings of the
First Conference on Machine Translation: Volume
2, Shared Task Papers, volume 2, pages 344–355.

Sager, Juan C. 1990. Practical course in terminology
processing. John Benjamins Publishing.

Selmer, Jan and Jakob Lauring. 2015. Host coun-
try language ability and expatriate adjustment: The
moderating effect of language difficulty. The Inter-
national Journal of Human Resource Management,
26(3):401–420.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 107



Sutskever, Ilya, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 3104–3112.

Toral, Antonio and Andy Way. 2018. What level of
quality can neural machine translation attain on liter-
ary text? In Translation Quality Assessment, pages
263–287. Springer.

Yamada, Marasu and Nanami Onishi. 2019. Can stu-
dents still work as a post-editor? In Proceedings
of 25th Annual Meeting of the Japanese Associa-
tion of Natural Language Processing, pages 738–
741. Japanese Association of Natural Language Pro-
cessing.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 108


