




































APE-QUEST: an MT Quality Gate 

Joachim Van den Bogaert, Heidi Depraetere, Sara Szoc, Tom Vanallemeersch, 
Koen Van Winckel, Frederic Everaert 

CrossLang 
Kerkstraat 106 

9050 Gentbrugge, Belgium 
{first.lastname}@crosslang.com 

 
Lucia Specia, Julia Ive 
University of Sheffield 

{initial.lastname}@sheffield.ac.uk 
 

Maxim Khalilov, Christine Maroti, Eduardo Farah*, Artur Ventura 
Unbabel 

Rua Visconde de Santarém, 67B 
1000-286 Lisboa, Portugal 

{firstname}@unbabel.com, *{first.lastname}@unbabel.com 
 

 Abstract 

The APE-QUEST project (2018–2020) 
sets up a quality gate and crowdsourcing 
workflow for the eTranslation system of 
EC’s Connecting Europe Facility to im-
prove translation quality in specific do-
mains. It packages these services as a 
translation portal for machine-to-machine 
and machine-to-human scenarios. 

1 Objectives 
The APE-QUEST project (Automated Post-
editing and Quality Estimation) is funded by the 
EC’s CEF Telecom programme (Connecting 
Europe Facility, project 2017-EU-IA-0151) and 
runs from October 2018 until September 2020. 
The project provides a quality gate and 
crowdsourcing workflow for the eTranslation 
machine translation (MT) system. The latter 
system is developed by the Directorate-General 
for Translation, supports all 24 official EU 
languages, and is provided by the CEF Automated 
Translation building block1 of the Directorate-
General for Communications Networks, Content 

                                                
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 
CCBY-ND. 
 

and Technology (DG CNECT) as a service to 
Digital Service Infrastructures (DSIs) of the EC 
and to public administrations of Member States. 
The APE-QUEST consortium consists of two 
companies, CrossLang (project coordinator) and 
Unbabel, and the University of Sheffield. 

APE-QUEST provides a quality gate by inject-
ing quality estimation (QE) and automated post-
editing (APE) into the translation workflow. QE 
and APE may be applied to the output of eTrans-
lation or to crowdsourced translation. The main 
objectives of this injection are (1) to improve MT 
quality with additional linguistic services and (2) 
to create data aggregation opportunities by mak-
ing translations and post-edits “locally owned”, in 
the sense that the data is generated and curated at 
the end user’s site, thus following the similar main 
principle of the EC’s ELRC action.2 

The APE-QUEST project focuses on integra-
tion of mature technologies: systems for MT, QE 
and APE, and an evironment for secure and relia-
ble exchange of data, i.e. the EC’s eDelivery 
building block. The tests in the project involve 
four languages, i.e. English, Portuguese, French 

1 https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital 
2 http://lr-coordination.eu (European Language 
Resources Coordination) 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 110



and Dutch, and several domains, such as e-pro-
curement and online dispute resolution. 

2 Architecture 
The workflow consists of three tiers: (1) MT 
output with acceptable quality flows directly to 
the end user or connected system, (2) moderate-
quality MT is enhanced through APE, and (3) 
low-quality MT is sent to a workflow for manual 
PE (crowdsourcing), after which QE and APE can 
be applied optionally, as an additional quality 
assurance step.  

The input to the workflow consists of text snip-
pets (messages) or full text documents originating 
from the project’s stakeholders, such as DSIs, 
public services in Member States, and organisa-
tions involved in CEF Telecom projects that make 
use of eTranslation. The input is provided through 
an API or a user interface (UI) and is segmented 
into sentences to allow for complex routing. For 
example, if only one low-quality sentence is de-
tected, only one tier 3 request is issued, while the 
rest of the sentences is routed to tiers 1 and 2. 

                                                
3 http://www.elri-project.eu (European Language 
Resource Infrastructure)  

The injection of a PE workflow allows for col-
lecting user data for system improvement. These 
data will be made available to re-train and adapt 
the eTranslation  system, and to re-train the QE 
and APE systems. The data will also be made 
available to ELRC, thus extending the latter’s re-
sources with postedited data, and to the ELRI pro-
ject,3 which collects, prepares and shares language 
resources. 

APE-QUEST’s reference implementation will 
be compliant with the eTranslation system and the 
eDelivery building  block  (developed in the 
framework of the EC’s e-SENS4 project), will 
contain a portal-style front end, and will be pack-
aged in an easily deployable form for DSIs and 
public administrations of Member States. The 
workflow will be backward-compatible for sys-
tems that use the current eTranslation interface. 

Acknowledgement 

APE-QUEST is funded by the EC’s CEF Tele-
com programme (project 2017-EU-IA-0151). 
 

4 https://www.esens.eu  

Figure 1 Architecture of APE-QUEST 
 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 111


