



















































Semantic Modelling of Adjective-Noun Collocations Using FrameNet


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multiword Expressions and WordNet (MWE-WN 2019), pages 104–113
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

104

Semantic Modelling of Adjective-Noun Collocations Using FrameNet

Yana Strakatova, Erhard Hinrichs
University of Tübingen, Germany

firstname.lastname@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract

In this paper we argue that Frame Semantics
(Fillmore, 1982) provides a good framework
for semantic modelling of adjective-noun col-
locations. More specifically, the notion of
a frame is rich enough to account for nouns
from different semantic classes and to model
semantic relations that hold between an ad-
jective and a noun in terms of Frame El-
ements. We have substantiated these find-
ings by considering a sample of adjective-
noun collocations from German such as en-
ger Freund ‘close friend’ and starker Re-
gen ‘heavy rain’. The data sample is taken
from different semantic fields identified in
the German wordnet GermaNet (Hamp and
Feldweg, 1997; Henrich and Hinrichs, 2010).
The study is based on the electronic dictio-
nary DWDS (Klein and Geyken, 2010) and
uses the collocation extraction tool Wortpro-
fil (Geyken et al., 2009). The FrameNet mod-
elling is based on the online resource avail-
able at http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu. Since
FrameNets are available for a range of typo-
logically different languages, it is feasible to
extend the current case study to other lan-
guages.

1 Introduction

Collocations such as to make a mistake and black
coffee are multi-word expressions (MWEs) in
which the choice of one constituent (base) is free,
and the choice of the other one (collocate) is re-
stricted and depends on the base (Wanner et al.,
2006). Collocations are in the grey area be-
tween free phrases like black car and idiomatic
MWEs such as black sheep, and in some cases
it is challenging to draw the line between those
concepts. As opposed to mere co-occurrences
of words based on their frequencies, collocations
show a certain degree of lexical rigidity which re-
sults in their partial lexicalization. This creates

difficulties for the non-native speakers when in-
terpreting and especially producing such expres-
sions because a substitution of the restricted com-
ponent with a synonymous word is not allowed by
the language (Bartsch, 2004). Therefore, combi-
nations such as *to do a mistake or *dark coffee
are not acceptable and sound unnatural to the na-
tive speakers, but they still can be interpreted cor-
rectly. Idiomatic MWEs such as black sheep are
semantically opaque and belong to the domain of
figurative language.

In spite of the fact that collocations have been
getting more attention in the recent decades, there
is a lack of systematic empirical studies on their
semantic properties. Most of the previous cor-
pus studies of collocations are concerned with
their statistical properties and the ways to im-
prove methods of automatic collocation extraction
(Church et al., 1991; Smadja, 1993; Evert, 2004;
Pecina, 2008; Bouma, 2009). These authors have
shown that automatic and/or manual extraction of
collocations is not an easy task. Our research does
not attempt to contribute to this growing body of
research. Rather, we focus on the classification
and modelling of semantic relations that hold be-
tween a base and its collocate, e.g. the relation
of degree that holds between the collocate heavy
and its nominal base rain. More specifically,
we will focus on the semantic relations that hold
in adjective-noun collocations, since such collo-
cations have received considerably less attention
than verb-noun collocations.

In our research, we utilize existing lexical re-
sources that reliably identify adjective-noun collo-
cations. For purely opportunistic reasons, we have
chosen German as our language of investigation
since there are a number of digital resources for
German, including the DWDS (short for the Dig-
itales Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache) (Klein
and Geyken, 2010) and GermaNet (Hamp and



105

Feldweg, 1997; Henrich and Hinrichs, 2010), that
offer a broad coverage of adjectives and nouns as
the two word classes under investigation.

The remainder of this paper is structured as
follows: Section 2 introduces the notion of col-
location in more detail and describes the related
work on the semantic classification of colloca-
tions. Section 3 presents our own proposal of how
to deal with semantics of collocations; we argue
that the notion of a semantic frame in the sense of
FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al., 2016) provides a
suitably general semantic framework that is appli-
cable to a wide range of semantic fields. Further-
more, we argue that collocations offer an interest-
ing empirical domain for validating the structure
of semantic frames and for further developing the
FrameNet framework itself. The paper concludes
with summary of our approach and with the dis-
cussion of different directions for future work.

2 Concept of collocation and related
work

Following the logic of Nesselhauf (2003) and
Mel’čuk (1998) , we consider the following types
of statistical co-occurrences true collocations:

1. the collocate has a specific sense with a lim-
ited number of words from different seman-
tic fields, e.g. ‘heavy’ as intensifier: heavy
smoker, heavy rain, heavy traffic. The adjec-
tive’s sense is not prototypical, since it does
not refer to the physical weight, but to inten-
sity.

2. the collocate has a specific sense only with
one or very few semantically related bases,
e.g. black coffee. The adjective’s sense here
is not prototypical, since it does not refer to
the colour, but to the fact, that no dairy prod-
ucts are added to the coffee.

3. the sense of the collocate is so specific that
it can be used with only one or very few se-
mantically closely related bases, e.g. aquiline
nose/face (Mel’čuk, 1998). That is the adjec-
tive’s only sense.

As our empirical basis we rely on the electronic
dictionary DWDS. The DWDS contains a rich lex-
icographic treatment of collocations on the ba-
sis of the collocation extraction tool Wortprofil
(Geyken et al., 2009). Figure 1 shows an excerpt
of the Wortprofil for the German noun Freund

‘friend’.1 It illustrates the information contained
in such a word profile.

As Wanner (2006) emphasizes, collocation ex-
traction typically only results in lists of colloca-
tions that are classified according to their morpho-
syntactic structure, but that do not provide any se-
mantic information about the combinations. Se-
mantic modelling of collocations requires a theo-
retical framework with a rich inventory that can be
used for describing the relations between the base
and its collocate. Such an inventory is offered in
the form of Lexical Functions (LFs) in Mel’čuk’s
Meaning ↔Text Theory (Mel’čuk, 1996). A LF
is a function in the mathematical sense: f(x) = y,
where a general and abstract sense f is expressed
by a certain lexical unit y depending on the lex-
ical unit x it is associated with (Mel’čuk, 1995).
The number of standard LFs is limited to about
60, and they have fixed names, e.g. for intensi-
fiers the LF Magn is suggested: Magn [RAIN]
= heavy. For other cases the non-standard LFs
are suggested. They are very specific, and their
names are formulated in a natural language: e.g.
obtained in an illegal way [MONEY] = dirty. LFs
have been widely used in lexicographic projects on
describing French semantic derivations and collo-
cations (Polguere, 2000), and have also been im-
plemented in the Spanish online dictionary of col-
locations (DiCE) that focuses on describing emo-
tion lexemes (Vincze et al., 2011). Mel’čuk and
Wanner (1994) employ LFs to represent colloca-
tion information for German lexemes from the se-
mantic field of emotions. Wanner (2004) conducts
experiments on automatic classification of Span-
ish verb-noun collocations based on the typology
of LFs, and continues to work on this problem us-
ing different algorithms (Wanner et al., 2006).

The works by Wanner (2004; 2006) mostly
concentrate on verbal collocations, for which the
Meaning-Text Theory provides at least 24 sim-
ple verbal LFs that can further be combined into
complex LFs. By comparison, adjective-noun
collocations have received less attention and the
set of proposed adjectival LFs is relatively small:
there are six simple adjectival LFs (Mel’čuk,
2015). Thus, our main objective is to find a suit-
able framework for describing adjectival colloca-
tions. Jousse (2007) proposes a way of formal-
izing non-standard adjectival LFs through assign-

1DWDS-Wortprofil for “Freund”, generated
from Digitales Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache,
https://www.dwds.de/wp/Freund, accessed on 04.29.2019.



106

Figure 1: The top-10 adjective collocates as listed in
the Wortprofil for the noun Freund ‘friend’.

ing attributes to the base word, e.g. shape, size,
colour, function. These attributes can be compared
to Frame Elements in Frame Semantics (Fillmore,
1982) and to the Qualia Roles in the theory of Gen-
erative Lexicon by J. Pustejovsky (1991). Qualia
roles have been implemented as the underlying
framework in the construction of SIMPLE lexi-
con (Bel et al., 2000). While they are easily ap-
plicable for the treatment of concrete nouns, they
fail to suitably generalize the semantics of abstract
nouns.

By contrast, the concept of semantic roles in
Frame Semantics is not restricted to concrete
nouns, but applies equally well to other seman-
tic fields as well (for details see section 3 below).
The main idea of Frame Semantics is that word
meanings are defined relative to a set of seman-
tic frames, which represent non-linguistic entities
such as events, states of affairs, beliefs, and emo-
tions, and which are evoked by the use of cor-
responding words in a particular language. Se-
mantic Frames for English are described in the
lexical database FrameNet (FrameNet-Database)
in terms of Frame Elements (FEs) (Ruppenhofer
et al., 2016). The database provides a rich cover-
age of nouns and adjectives from different seman-
tic fields, currently there are 5558 nouns and 2396
adjectives, and the resource is under further devel-
opment. The further advantage of FrameNet is that
it can be adapted for other languages. As demon-
strated by Boas (2005) and Padó (2007), a trans-
fer of existing frame annotations from English to
other languages is possible: there is a high degree
of cross-lingual parallelism both for frames (70%)
and for Frame Elements (90%) (Padó, 2007). For
the reasons outlined above, we will use Frame El-

ements in the sense of FrameNet for the semantic
modelling of adjective-noun collocations.

3 Semantic Modelling of Collocations

As motivated in the previous section, the main
objective of this study is to develop a frame-
work for semantic modelling of German adjective-
noun collocations. To assess the applicability of
FrameNet for modelling of collocations, we have
investigated eleven frames for nouns from various
semantic fields (see Table 1). The corresponding
semantic fields were assigned according to the in-
formation from the German wordnet GermaNet,
and the estimates about the degree of concreteness
of the chosen nouns are provided by the MRC Psy-
cholinguistic Database (Wilson, 1988). The nom-
inal bases have been chosen on the basis of fre-
quency and richness of collocates. The stage of
choosing the candidates for modelling showed that
there are significant differences in the behaviour of
concrete and abstract nouns: the latter ones have a
greater number and a richer variety of collocates
(see Table 2). As explained in the previous sec-
tion, we employ English FrameNet for German
collocations. Semantic Frames in FrameNet de-
scribe non-linguistic concepts and deal with mean-
ings rather than with particular lexical units in a
language. Thus, a correct translation of the tar-
get German word into English makes it possi-
ble to apply the information contained in the En-
glish FrameNet to German data. In collocations,
it is only the collocate (the adjective) that is lan-
guage specific, and thus is problematic to translate.
However, we consider the semantically transpar-
ent base (noun) to be the frame-evoking word, and
such words do not cause any difficulties for trans-
lation.

3.1 Modelling concrete nouns
The number of true collocates for concrete nouns
is relatively small due to several reasons. First
of all, when combined with concrete nouns, most
adjectives retain their prototypical meaning: enge
Straße ‘narrow street’, großes Haus ‘big house’,
hoher Turm ‘tall tower’, such expressions are con-
sidered free phrases. In addition, there are a lot of
cases where a concrete noun is part of an idiomatic
expression.2

2Depending on the context, a combination of two words
with concrete meaning can either be a free phrase or an idiom:
roter Faden lit. ‘red thread’, fig. ‘common theme’; raues
Pflaster lit. ‘rough pavement’, fig. ‘harsh environment’,



107

Lexical Unit MRCRating Semantic field in GermaNet Frame in FrameNet

Schokolade ‘chocolate’ 576 Nahrung ‘food’ Food
Droge ‘drug’ 555 Substanz ‘substance’ Intoxicants
Schuh ‘shoe’ 600 Artifakt ‘artefact’ Clothing
Wald ‘forest’ 609 Ort ‘location’ Biological area
Regen ‘rain’ 600 natPhaenomen ‘phenomenon’ Precipitation
Freund ‘friend’ 450 Mensch ‘person’ Personal relationship
Interesse ‘interest’ 305 Kognition ‘cognition’ Emotion directed
Angst ‘fear’ 326 Gefühl ‘feeling’ Fear
Thema ‘issue/topic’ 338 Kommunikation ‘communication’ Point of dispute
Strafe ‘punishment’ 358 Geschehen ‘event’ Rewards and punishments
Preis ‘price’ - Besitz ‘possession’ Commerce scenario

Table 1: The chosen nominal bases from different semantic fields. The ratings from the MRC Psycholinguistic
Database (Wilson, 1988) indicate the level of concreteness of the nouns (in the range 100 to 700).

When concrete nouns do form true collocations,
the sense of their collocates is not prototypical, yet
it is highly conventionalized. Consider the follow-
ing collocates of the word Schokolade ‘chocolate’:
schwarz lit.‘black’, dunkel ‘dark’, weiß ‘white’. In
FrameNet the lexical unit (LU) ‘chocolate’ evokes
the frame “Food” with Frame Elements (FEs)
FOOD, CONSTITUENT PARTS, DESCRIPTOR, and
TYPE. Although it is true that dark chocolate has
a darker colour than milk chocolate, when we use
the expression dunkle Schokolade, we do not re-
fer to the colour of the product, but to the fact that
it contains a high percentage of cocoa and little
or no milk. The same is true for weiße Schokolade
‘white chocolate’: it indeed has a very light colour,
but it is due to the fact that such type of chocolate
is made of cocoa butter and does not contain co-
coa powder. FrameNet offers a suitable FE TYPE
for describing the relation that holds between these
adjectives and the noun. It is defined in FrameNet
as follows: “This FE identifies a particular Type
of the food item” (FrameNet-Database). A similar
logic is applied to the collocates of the noun Droge
‘drug’: the collocates hart ‘hard’, weich ‘soft’, and
leicht ‘light’ are accommodated by the FE TYPE
within the frame “Intoxicants”.3 In the case of
the artefact Schuh ‘shoe’, there are only two collo-
cates (hochhackig ‘high-heeled’, flach ‘flat’) and
the corresponding frame “Clothing” offers a suit-

goldene Nase (verdienen) lit. ‘(to earn) golden nose’, fig.
‘to earn a lot of money’; etc. Some cases include metonymy:
offenes Ohr lit. ‘open ear’, fig. ‘person ready to listen’; heller
Kopf lit. ‘bright head’, fig. ‘smart person’.

3Other similar examples are the collocations grüner Tee
‘green tea’ and schwarzer Tee ‘black tea’.

able semantic role STYLE.
When a noun is less concrete, e.g. Regen ‘rain’

that is a natural phenomenon and thus is a pro-
cess, the list of its collocates is longer. The noun
evokes the frame “Precipitation” and all the col-
locates are accommodated by the suitable frame
elements. For example, under QUANTITY the fol-
lowing attributes are found: sintflutartig ‘torren-
tial’, stark ‘heavy’, kräftig ‘heavy’, leicht ‘light’.
All those adjectives describe rain in terms of the
amount of water that falls in the process. The same
is true for the modifier strömend ‘pouring’, how-
ever, it carries an extra meaning of the manner in
which it can rain and is therefore assigned to the
FE MANNER.

3.2 Modelling abstract nouns

Abstract concepts have a complex meaning
which is reflected in the amount of seman-
tic roles describing the corresponding frame
and in the amount of attributes through which
the semantic roles are realised in the lan-
guage. For instance, according to the FrameNet
Database (FrameNet-Database), the frame “Per-
sonal relationship” evoked by the noun Freund
‘friend’ has the following non-core FEs:

• Depictive: Depictive phrase describing the
Partners.
• Degree: Degree to which event occurs
• Duration: The length of the relationship.
• Manner: Manner of performing an action.
• Means: An act whereby a focal participant

achieves an action indicated by the target.



108

LU FE name Collocates

Schokolade
Food (Core) heiß ‘hot’
Descriptor edel ‘premium’

Type schwarz ‘dark’, dunkel ‘dark’, weiß ‘white’
Droge Type hart ‘hard’, weich ‘soft’, leicht ‘soft’
Schuh Style hochhackig ‘high-heeled’, flach ‘flat’

Wald
Descriptor tief ‘deep’

Contituent parts licht ‘open’

Regen

Precipitation (Core) sauer ‘acid’
Manner strömend ‘pouring’

Quantity
sintflutartig ‘torrential’, stark ‘heavy’,

kräftig ‘heavy’, leicht ‘light’

Freund

Degree eng ‘close’, dick ‘close’ (Pl)
Duration alt ‘old’
Manner wahr ‘true’, echt ‘real’, falsch ‘fake’

Relationship fest ‘boyfriend’

Interesse

Experiencer(Core) ureigen ‘vested’, widerstreitend ‘conflicting’
Topic(Core) materiell ‘material’

Degree
groß ‘strong/big’, stark ‘strong’, hoch ‘strong’,

massiv ‘massive’

Manner
rege ‘active’, lebhaft ‘lively’, vital ‘lively’,

echt ‘genuine’, wahr ‘genuine’

Parameter
breit ‘broad’, handfest ‘concrete’,

elementar ‘fundamental’, vital ‘vital’
Circumstances unmittelbar ‘direct’

Angst

Degree groß ‘strong/big’, tief ‘deep’ , höllisch ‘hellish’

Circumstances
panisch ‘panic’, unterschwellig ‘subconscious’,

krankhaft ‘pathological’

Manner
blank ‘sheer’, pur ‘pure’, nackt ‘pure’, diffus ‘vague’,

dumpf ‘vague’
Topic existenziell ‘existential’

Thema

Domain sperrig ‘unwieldy’ , weich ‘vague’
Time brennend ‘urgent’, drängend ‘pressing’

Group
unbequem ‘uncomfortable’, heikel ‘delicate’,

sensibel ‘sensitive’, brisant ‘controversial’, leidig ‘vexed’
Status groß ‘big/major’, heiß ‘hot’, beherrschend ‘dominant’

Strafe

Instrument symbolisch ‘symbolic’, unmenschlich ‘inhumane’

Degree

drakonisch ‘draconian’, hart ‘harsh’ , empfindlich ‘severe’
saftig ‘stiff’, streng ‘strict’, scharf ‘harsh’,

schwer ‘heavy’, deftig ‘severe’, hoch ‘high’,
mild ‘mild’, niedrig ‘weak’

Preis Rate
horrend ‘horrendous’, stolz ‘stiff’, hoch ‘high’,

erschwinglich ‘affordable’, vernünftig ‘reasonable’,
niedrig ‘low’, fest ‘fixed’, stabil ‘stable’

Table 2: Semantic modelling of German adjective-noun collocations using Frame Elements from FrameNet.



109

• Relationship: The Relationship between
Partners.
• Source of relationship: The source of the

relationship.

The semantic roles as well as the name of the
frame suggest that, in many contexts, the word
‘friend’ does not refer to a person as a human
being of certain age, appearance, ethnicity, etc.,
but to the relationship people are engaged in. In
German, the adjectives eng lit. ‘narrow’ or dick
lit. ‘thick’ are both used with Freund in the sense
‘close’, thus describing the DEGREE of friendship.
The collocate alt ‘old’ implies that the friendship
has lasted for some time to the moment of speak-
ing and can therefore be accommodate by the FE
DURATION. When using wahr ‘true’, echt ‘real’,
falsch ‘fake’ in connection with friendship, we re-
fer to its quality, the most suitable FE of that kind
in this case is MANNER. There are also border-
line cases, when the suitable FE is not obvious, as
in the case of the word fest ‘steady’ (lit. ‘solid’).
At first glance, the modifier characterizes MAN-
NER; however, in German, the expression fester
Freund means ‘boyfriend’ that actually refers to
the nature of the relationship between the part-
ners. Therefore, the most suitable FE for that ad-
jective is RELATIONSHIP. All the adjectival mod-
ifiers find corresponding semantic roles, however,
not all the FEs are realised through adjectives and
some of the slots such as MEANS or DEPICTIVE
are left empty. Such unrealised FEs are not listed
in Table 2.

An accurate mapping of collocates to corre-
sponding FEs is possible for other semantic fields
as well. Consider an example from the field
of cognition: Interesse ‘interest’. In FrameNet
it evokes the frame “Emotion directed”. It has
an EXPERIENCER referred to by the adjectives
ureigen ‘vested’ and widerstreitend ‘conflicting’;
MANNER (rege ‘active’, lebhaft ‘lively’, vital
‘lively’, echt ‘genuine’, and wahr ‘genuine’);
TOPIC (materiell ‘material’); PARAMETER (breit
‘wide’, handfest ‘concrete’, elementar ‘funda-
mental’, and vital ‘vital’); and CIRCUMSTANCES
(unmittelbar ‘direct’). It also has a property of in-
tensity described in the frame as DEGREE. This
FE accommodates the collocates groß ‘strong’,
stark ‘strong’, hoch ‘strong’, and massiv ‘mas-
sive’.

A similar pattern is found for the emotion noun
Angst ‘fear’. Consider its collocates:

groß ‘strong’, nackt ‘pure’, höllisch
‘hellish’, panisch ‘panic’, pur ‘pure’, un-
terschwellig ‘subconscious’, blank ‘sheer’,
diffus ‘vague’, tief ‘deep’, dumpf ‘vague’,
existenziell ‘existential’, krankhaft ‘patho-
logical’

The identified relevant FEs are as follows
(FrameNet-Database):

• Degree: The extent to which the Experi-
encer’s emotion deviates from the norm for
the emotion.
• Circumstances: The Circumstances is the

condition(s) under which the Stimulus evokes
its response. In some cases it may appear
without an explicit Stimulus. Quite often in
such cases, the Stimulus can be inferred from
the Circumstances.
• Manner: Any description of the way in

which the Experiencer experiences the Stim-
ulus which is not covered by more specific
FEs, including secondary effects (quietly,
loudly), and general descriptions comparing
events (the same way). Manner may also de-
scribe a state of the Experiencer that affects
the details of the emotional experience.
• Topic: The Topic is the general area in which

the emotion occurs. It indicates a range of
possible Stimulus.

The interpretation of some collocates is
straightforward: the adjective existenziell ‘exis-
tential’ indicates the area of the stimulus and is
modelled as TOPIC. The collocates groß ‘strong’
and tief ‘deep’ are used as intensifiers and are,
therefore, assigned to the FE DEGREE. The word
höllisch ‘hellish’ is frequently used as an inten-
sifier with Schmerz ‘pain’ and carries the same
meaning with ‘fear’, thus it is also assigned to DE-
GREE. The other adjectives do not reveal any in-
formation about the intensity of the experienced
emotion: blank ‘sheer’, pur ‘pure’, and nackt
‘pure’ rather imply that, at a particular moment,
fear is the only emotion guiding the behaviour of
a person. This interpretation fits the definition of
MANNER, and so do the collocates diffus ‘vague’
and dumpf ‘vague’. The remaining three adjec-
tives (panisch, unterschwellig, krankhaft) could
also be assigned to MANNER, however, there is
more information in their meaning than it may
seem. These collocations are very close to psycho-
logical terms, as well as ‘existential’, but they re-
fer to certain conditions under which fear might be



110

experienced rather than to the area of the stimulus.
In such cases context is helpful; consider the fol-
lowing examples from the DWDS-Wortprofil for
the noun Angst4:

1. Deshalb habe die Frau panische Angst
vor ihrem sehr dominanten Mann gehabt.
eng. ‘That is why the woman had a panic
fear of her dominant husband’.
2. Dann spricht man von Erythrophobie,
der krankhaften Angst zu erröten.
eng. ‘This is referred to as erythrophobia,
a pathological fear of blushing’.
3. Es ist eine unterschwellige, alltägliche
Angst, mit der die Bürger leben.
eng. ‘It is a subconscious everyday fear the
citizens live with’.

The examples illustrate that these three collocates
describe a certain kind of fear triggered by a par-
ticular stimulus, but the stimulus itself can only be
derived from the context. Thus, the most suitable
semantic role for accommodating the collocates is
CIRCUMSTANCES.

All the above described cases demonstrate that
semantic roles present in abstract collocations are
quite diverse, and the relations can well be gen-
eralized using FrameNet’s inventory of frame el-
ements. There are, however, nouns, that seem to
be less diverse when in comes to the number of
attributes realized through adjectives. This is the
case when a noun has a certain kind of scale at the
core of its meaning. For instance, the noun Strafe
‘punishment/penalty’ is mostly modified in terms
of how strict the inflicted punishment is:

drakonisch ‘draconian’, mild ‘mild’, hart
‘harsh’ , empfindlich ‘severe’, hoch ‘high’,
niedrig ‘weak’, saftig ‘stiff’, streng
‘strict’, scharf ‘harsh’, unmenschlich ‘in-
humane’, schwer ‘heavy’, symbolisch
‘symbolic’, deftig ‘severe’

They can all be accomodated by the FE DEGREE.
However, two adjectives from this list stand out
in their meaning: symbolisch ‘symbolic’ and un-
menschlich ‘inhumane’, they carry an extra mean-
ing describing a kind of penalty, which is reflected
in the FE INSTRUMENT (“The Instrument with
which the reward or punishment is carried out”
(FrameNet-Database)).

4DWDS-Wortprofil for “Angst”, generated
from Digitales Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache,
https://www.dwds.de/wp/Angst, accessed on 04.29.2019.

A similar situation holds for nouns from other
semantic fields. Consider the noun ‘price’: it is
defined in FrameNet as “the amount of money ex-
pected, required, or given in payment for some-
thing” (FrameNet-Database). The list of its collo-
cates contains the following adjectives:

horrend ‘horrendous’, vernünftig ‘reason-
able’, erschwinglich ‘affordable’ , stolz
‘stiff’, hoch ‘high’, niedrig ‘low’, fest
‘fixed’, stabil ‘stable’

They all refer to the scale “the amount of money”,
the latter two emphasize that there are no changes
on the scale, whereas the others show the degree
of how high the certain amount is from the point
of view of the customer. The noun ‘price’ evokes
the frame ‘Commerce scenario” with the follow-
ing FEs: BUYER, SELLER, GOODS, MONEY,
MEANS, PURPOSE, RATE, UNIT. The most suit-
able FE in this case is RATE that according to
FrameNet describes price or payment per unit of
Goods and is therefore the closest to the concept
of a scale in this frame.

The examples illustrate that frame semantics of-
fers a varied inventory for modelling semantic re-
lations between the constituents of collocations
independently of the semantic field of the noun,
either concrete or abstract. FrameNet provides
frame semantic information about many lexical
units; however, it is still under development and
there are cases, when the frame evoked by a noun
does not reflect all the aspects of its meaning. This
issue is discussed in more detail in the next subsec-
tion.

3.3 Challenges

More than one thousand frames are described in
FrameNet, thus providing a rich coverage of the
lexicon. However, there is always the fundamen-
tal issue of granularity that affects the groupings of
LUs into frames. There are cases when adjectival
collocates provide additional information about a
word’s semantics, but where there are no suitable
FEs to accommodate this additional aspect of a
word’s meaning. The following examples illus-
trate the issue. Consider the collocates of the noun
Zukunft ‘future’ :

nah ‘near’, unmittelbar ‘immediate’, fern
‘distant’, weit ‘distant’, entfernt ‘dis-
tant’, rosig ‘rosy’, glänzend ‘bright’,
licht ‘bright’, golden ‘golden’, strahlend
‘bright’, hell ‘bright’, blühend ‘prosper-



111

ous’, leuchtend ‘bright’, groß ‘great’,
glanzvoll ‘bright’, dunkel ‘dark’, düster
‘dark’, stabil ‘stable’

Some of them refer to the temporal proximity
of future, the others are evaluative descriptors
(mostly positive ones). The frame evoked by ‘fu-
ture’ in FrameNet is “Alternatives” with the fol-
lowing FEs (FrameNet-Database):

• Agent: An individual involved in the Event.
• Salient entity: An entity intimately involved

in the Event.
• Situation: Something that may happen in the

future, or at least whose factual status is un-
resolved. -
• Number of possibilities: The number of

different future Events under consideration.
• Purpose: The state-of-affairs that the Agent

hopes to bring about which is associated with
some of the possible Events but not others.

None of the FEs reflects the evaluative or the tem-
poral aspect of the meaning of the noun ‘future’
expressed by the collocates above. This means
that additional FEs need to be inserted into the
frame “Alternatives”. The most appropriate FEs
appear to be DESCRIPTOR which in FrameNet
refers to descriptive characteristics and properties,
and TIME.

Consider another example: the frame “Calen-
dric unit” is evoked by LUs denoting seasons,
days of the week, months, times of the day, etc.
The FEs describing this frame refer to different as-
pects of time. However, some, but not all of the
LUs that evoke this frame have collocates refer-
ring to the weather or the state of nature: winter
can be ‘mild’ or ‘harsh’ (in the sense of tempera-
ture/weather), autumn, and September or October
are ‘golden’. Such LUs should be accommodated
by a subframe that inherits from the frame “Calen-
dric unit” and contains additional FEs referring to
weather and/or state of nature.

4 Conclusion and future work

In this paper we have argued that Frame Se-
mantics provides a good framework for semantic
modelling of adjective-noun collocations. More
specifically, the notion of a frame is rich enough to
account for nouns from different semantic classes
and to model semantic relations that hold between
an adjective and a noun in terms of Frame Ele-
ments. We have substantiated these findings by

considering a sample of adjective-noun colloca-
tions from German that are taken from different
semantic fields identified in the German wordnet
GermaNet. We are grateful to the anonymous re-
viewer for raising an interesting question concern-
ing the applicability of FrameNet’s semantic rela-
tions to adjective-noun free phrases as well.

In future research, we plan to perform the mod-
elling on a larger scale. For this purpose, we
are currently preparing a large dataset contain-
ing more than 2000 German adjective-noun col-
locations. We will continue to use the dictionary
DWDS and its collocation extraction tool Wort-
profil as the empirical basis for obtaining the data.
The resulting data sample will cover nouns and ad-
jectives from all the semantic classes identified in
GermaNet. We will use this dataset to examine
FrameNet’s coverage of lexical units from differ-
ent semantic fields. But even if a lexical frame ex-
ists for a given noun, the Frame Elements included
in the lexical frame may not suffice. As described
in the previous subsection, the structure of some
semantic frames lacks important FEs, which there-
fore need to be added. Therefore, the overall ob-
jective in the future work is to examine various se-
mantic frames and their Frame Elements in terms
of their comprehensiveness and applicability for
modelling diverse relations that hold between col-
location constituents.

A second important objective of our future re-
search will be to address the question of reliability
of annotations for the semantics of collocations on
the basis of FrameNet. To this end, we plan to
conduct an inter-annotator agreement study. This
study will be informed by detailed instructions to
the annotators in the form of written guidelines on
how to identify the correct Frame Elements for a
given collocation.

As mentioned in Section 2, one of the advan-
tages of FrameNet is that it can be adapted for
other languages. Therefore, it is worthwhile to
conduct a comparative study on semantic annota-
tion of collocations based on FrameNet for lan-
guages other than German. We plan to conduct
such a study for Russian and English, since rele-
vant resources and points of comparison are avail-
able for each of those two languages. For Russian,
the Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary of Rus-
sian (Mel’cuk and Zholkovsky, 1984) describes
collocations in terms of Lexical Functions à la
Mel’čuk. The Macmillan Collocations Dictionary



112

for Learners of English (Macmillan, 2010) pro-
vides a rich coverage of English lexicon with se-
mantic grouping of collocates for each base word
and uses short definitions to describe such seman-
tic sets. We plan to evaluate the relative merits
of different annotation schemes and expect that it
will be of further benefit for our research on collo-
cations as MWEs.

Extending the present study to Russian will also
provide an opportunity to compare the present
approach that classifies collocations in terms of
Frame Elements with Mel’čuk’s classification ac-
cording to Lexical Functions. One noteworthy dif-
ference that is apparent already at this point is that
FrameNet’s semantic relations can also be applied
to describe free phrases, whereas the application
of LFs is limited to lexically restricted combina-
tions (Mel’čuk, 1995; Mel’čuk, 2015).5

Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial
support of the research reported here by the grant
Modellierung lexikalisch-semantischer Beziehun-
gen von Kollokationen awarded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). We would also
like to thank three anonymous reviewers for their
constructive remarks on an earlier version of this
paper.

References
Sabine Bartsch. 2004. Structural and functional prop-

erties of collocations in English: A corpus study
of lexical and pragmatic constraints on lexical co-
occurrence. Gunter Narr Verlag.

Nuria Bel, Federica Busa, Nicoletta Calzolari, Elisa-
betta Gola, Alessandro Lenci, Monica Monachini,
Antoine Ogonowski, Ivonne Peters, Wim Peters,
Nilda Ruimy, Marta Villegas, and Antonio Zam-
polli. 2000. SIMPLE: A general framework for
the development of multilingual lexicons. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’00),
Athens, Greece. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

Hans C. Boas. 2005. Semantic Frames as Interlingual
Representations for Multilingual Lexical Databases.
International Journal of Lexicography, 18(4):445–
478.

Gerlof Bouma. 2009. Normalized (pointwise) mutual
information in collocation extraction. Proceedings
of GSCL, pages 31–40.
5We would like to thank an anonymous reviewer for rais-

ing this issue.

Kenneth Church, William Gale, Patrick Hanks, and
Donald Hindle. 1991. Using statistics in lexical
analysis. In Lexical Acquisition: Exploiting On-
Line Resources to Build a Lexicon, pages 115–164.
Erlbaum.

Stefan Evert. 2004. The Statistics of Word Cooccur-
rences: Word Pairs and Collocations. Ph.D. thesis,
Institut für maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Univer-
sity of Stuttgart.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1982. Frame Semantics. In Lin-
guistics in the Morning Calm, pages 111–137. Han-
shin Publishing Co., Seoul, South Korea.

FrameNet-Database. Berkeley FrameNet Project.
FrameNet Project.

Alexander Geyken, Jorg Didakowski, and Alexander
Siebert. 2009. Generation of Word Profiles for
Large German Corpora. Corpus Analysis and Vari-
ation in Linguistics, 1:141–157.

Birgit Hamp and Helmut Feldweg. 1997. GermaNet -
a Lexical-Semantic Net for German. In Proceedings
of the ACL workshop Automatic Information Extrac-
tion and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for
NLP Applications.

Verena Henrich and Erhard Hinrichs. 2010. GernEdiT
- the GermaNet Editing Tool. In Proceedings
of the Seventh conference on International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Val-
letta, Malta. European Languages Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Anne-Laure Jousse. 2007. Formalizing non-standard
lexical functions. Wiener Slawistischer Almanach,
pages 219–228.

Wolfgang Klein and Alexander Geyken. 2010.
Das digitale Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache
(DWDS). In Lexicographica: International annual
for lexicography, pages 79–96. De Gruyter.

Macmillan. 2010. Macmillan Collocations Dictionary
for Learners of English. Macmillan Education.

Igor Mel’čuk. 1998. Collocations and lexical func-
tions. In A P Cowie, editor, Phraseology. Theory,
analysis, and applications, pages 23–53. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.

Igor Mel’čuk. 2015. Semantics: From meaning to text,
volume 3. John Benjamins Publishing Company.

Igor A Mel’čuk and Leo Wanner. 1994. Lexi-
cal co-occurrence and lexical inheritance. Emotion
lexemes in German: A lexicographic case study.
Lexikos, 4:86–161.

Igor Mel’čuk. 1996. Lexical functions: a tool for the
description of lexical relations in a lexicon. Lexi-
cal functions in lexicography and natural language
processing, 31:37–102.

http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2000/pdf/61.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2000/pdf/61.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijl/eci043
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijl/eci043
https://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W97-0802
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W97-0802
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/264_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/264_Paper.pdf


113

Igor A Mel’čuk. 1995. Russkij jazyk v modeli “Smysl-
Tekst”. Moskva, Vena.

Igor A Mel’cuk and Alexander K Zholkovsky. 1984.
Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary of Modern
Russian. Wiener Slawistischer Almanach, Vienna.

Nadja Nesselhauf. 2003. The use of collocations by
advanced learners of English and some implications
for teaching. Applied linguistics, 24(2):223–242.

Sebastian Padó. 2007. Cross-lingual annotation pro-
jection models for role-semantic information. Ph.D.
thesis, Saarland University.

Pavel Pecina. 2008. Lexical Association Measures:
Collocation Extraction. Ph.D. thesis, Faculty of
Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Alain Polguere. 2000. Towards a theoretically-
motivated general public dictionary of semantic
derivations and collocations for French. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th EURALEX International Congress,
pages 517–527, Stuttgart, Germany. Institut für
Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung.

James Pustejovsky. 1991. The Generative Lexicon.
Computational Linguistics, 17(4):409–441.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Myriam
Schwarzer-Petruck, Christopher R Johnson, and Jan
Scheffczyk. 2016. FrameNet II: Extended theory
and practice.

Frank Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations from text:
Xtract. Computational linguistics, 19(1):143–177.

Orsolya Vincze, Estela Mosqueira, and Margarita
Alonso Ramos. 2011. An online collocation dic-
tionary of Spanish. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Meaning-Text Theory.
Barcelona, pages 275–286.

Leo Wanner. 2004. Towards automatic fine-grained
semantic classification of verb-noun collocations.
Natural Language Engineering, 10(2):95–143.

Leo Wanner, Bernd Bohnet, and Mark Giereth. 2006.
Making sense of collocations. Computer Speech &
Language, 20(4):609–624.

Michael Wilson. 1988. MRC Psycholinguistic
Database: Machine-usable dictionary, version 2.00.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Com-
puters, 20(1):6–10.

http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=176321.176324
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03202594
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03202594

