



















































Ilfhocail: A Lexicon of Irish MWEs


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multiword Expressions and WordNet (MWE-WN 2019), pages 162–168
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

162

Ilfhocail: A Lexicon of Irish MWEs

Abigail Walsh Teresa Lynn Jennifer Foster
ADAPT Centre

School of Computing
Dublin City University

{abigail.walsh,teresa.lynn,jennifer.foster}@adaptcentre.ie

Abstract

This paper describes the categorisation of Irish
MWEs, and the construction of the first ver-
sion of a lexicon of Irish MWEs for NLP pur-
poses (Ilfhocail, meaning ‘Multiwords’), col-
lected from a number of resources. For the
purposes of quality assurance, 530 entries of
this lexicon were examined and manually an-
notated for POS and MWE category.

1 Introduction

Multiword expressions (MWEs), which make up
a considerable percentage of our mental lexicon
(Jackendoff, 1997), can be a bottleneck in Natu-
ral Language Processing (NLP) (Sag et al., 2002).
While there are several initiatives dedicated to
MWE research – PARSEME (Savary et al., 2017),
SIGLEX-MWE Workshops (Savary et al., 2018;
Markantonatou et al., 2017; Mitkov et al., 2017)
– the focus has tended to be on majority lan-
guages (Losnegaard et al., 2016). For many minor-
ity languages, a lack of resources has impeded re-
search. Irish is one such minority language. While
progress has been made over the past several years
in the area of Irish NLP (Uı́ Dhonnchadha and Van
Genabith, 2008; Scannell, 2014; Lynn et al., 2015;
Lynn, 2016), there is still a significant lack of tech-
nological support for identification and categori-
sation of MWEs. In fact, as a result, minimal la-
belling of MWEs is found in both Irish treebanks,
Irish Dependency Treebank (Lynn, 2016) and Uni-
versal Dependency Treebank (Nivre et al., 2018;
Lynn and Foster, 2016).

There have, however, been some theoretical
linguistic studies on particular forms of MWEs
in Irish. In her analysis of Irish syntax, Sten-
son (1981) describes idiomatic copular con-
structions, and verb-object constructions. Bloch-
Trojnar (2009) and Bayda (2015) have carried out
research on light verb constructions. Ó Domh-

nalláin and Ó Baoill (1975) have compiled a book
of verb-particle constructions and their meanings.
A valency dictionary for Irish verbs was created
by Wigger (2008) and his team (Foclóir Briathra
Gaeilge). Nı́ Loingsigh (2016) has compiled a
database of manually annotated idioms in Irish,
taken from the collections of an tAthair Peadair
Ó Laoghaire.

Our work aims to compile a comprehensive
lexicon of Irish MWEs (Ilfhocail) for the pur-
poses of NLP, by leveraging both existing mono-
lingual and bilingual lexical resources and gener-
ating new MWE entries through methods of semi-
automatic discovery. We compile the data from
various sources into a unified structure, and define
an MWE categorisation scheme. Our current lexi-
con contains 201,795 entries and a subset of these
will be released, subject to the licensing agree-
ments of the various sources.

We document the design decisions required
when combining data from the various lexical
sources currently available for Irish (Section 2).
We also find that Irish MWEs are not easily cat-
egorised according to standard MWE categories
(Section 3). We manually examine and categorise
a sample of 530 entries, both as a way to evaluate
the quality of the extracted MWEs and to assess
and inform our categorisation scheme (Section 4).

2 Compiling the lexicon

Although in some respects Irish can be considered
a low-resource language, valuable resources in the
form of Irish lexicons and Irish-English/English-
Irish dictionaries are now available. We extracted
MWE entries from the following resources in
XML format.

An Bunachar Náisiúnta Téarmaı́ochta don
Ghaeilge (The National Terminology Database



163

for Irish)1 The Tearma database, consisting of
about 185,000 entries, is the largest resource avail-
able. 141,031 of these entries were extracted
as MWEs, comprising about half of our lexicon.
The Tearma database can be downloaded as a txt
or tbx file from https://www.tearma.ie/
ioslodail/, and is available for personal use.

Lı́onra Séimeantach na Gaeilge (Irish Word-
net) This database, created by Kevin Scannell,
contains over 32,000 synsets. 8,995 MWE en-
tries were extracted from this resource. It can
be downloaded in several formats from https:
//cadhan.com/lsg/index-en.html un-
der the GNU Free Documentation License.

Peadar Ó Laoghaire Idiom Collection This
collection of idioms was extracted from the works
of Peadar Ó Laoghaire and annotated with addi-
tional information (Nı́ Loingsigh and Ó Raghal-
laigh, 2016). All 420 of these entries were added
to the Ilfhocail lexicon. The searchable corpus is
available at https://www.gaois.ie/bnl/
en/, and a downloadable version of the corpus
was made available to us for research purposes.

Pota Focal Gluais Tı́ (Pot of Words House
Glossary) The House Glossary was created
by Michal Boleslav Měchura, and contains
over 6,000 terms, 375 of which were ex-
tracted as MWEs for the lexicon. It is un-
der the Creative Commons Attribution Non-
Commercial Share-Alike licence and can be
downloaded from https://github.com/
michmech/pota-focal-gluais/.

The New English-Irish Dictionary1, and the
English-Irish Dictionary1 The electronic
searchable version of the English-Irish Dictionary
(de Bhaldraithe, 1959) was made available online
by Foras na Gaeilge, with their New English-Irish
Dictionary released in 2013 with revised entries
and additional grammatical information. There
were a combined total of 105,358 MWE entries
extracted from these dictionaries, though many of
these terms were duplicates (see below).

Foclóir Gaeilge-Béarla (Irish-English Dictio-
nary)1 This is an electronic searchable version
of the Irish-English dictionary (Ó Dónaill, 1977).
Only 48 of the 59,700 entries were MWEs; how-
ever, it was observed that the sense entries con-

1These resources were provided to us by Foras na
Gaeilge for research purposes and are not to be republished

tained many idiomatic uses of the entry word.
These sense entries (38,775) were added to the our
lexicon.

An Foclóir Beag (The Small Dictionary)1 This
is an electronic searchable version of the Foclóir
Beag dictionary (Ó Dónaill and Ua Maoileoin,
1991). 771 terms were extracted and added to the
lexicon.

2.1 Lexicon Structure
The lexicon is organised under the columns
GA-Head, GA, POS, EN, Source and ID.
GA-Head is the headword of the Irish entry, and
corresponds to the word that the entry was filed
under. Where this was not available (e.g. in the
English-Irish Dictionary, all expressions were un-
der an English headword), the first word of the
Irish entry was used. As Irish is a head-initial lan-
guage, given its VSO word order, and lack of in-
definite articles, this was deemed a sufficient de-
fault value. The Irish entry was listed under the
GA column.

While each MWE in the lexicon had an Irish en-
try, this was not always the case for POS informa-
tion and English translation, listed under POS and
EN respectively. The POS information extracted
from each resource varied from no POS label to
broad level POS information (noun, verb, etc.)
to more fine-grained syntactic information (tran-
sitivity, gender, number, etc.). English transla-
tions were present in all resources save the Lı́onra
Séimeantach na Gaeilge, the Peadar Ó Laoghaire
Idiom Collection and the Foclóir Beag.
Source is a three or four letter string indicat-

ing which dictionary it was extracted from. ID is
a unique string for each entry, created by concate-
nating the source code with a unique integer.

2.2 Cleaning
Some entries are present in a number of resources
and, even within one resource, there are multiple
instances of the same Irish MWE, with differing
POS or translations. We keep the entries distinct
on the POS level (1), but combine MWE entries
across different English translations and sources
(2). Several of the concatenated English transla-
tions for an MWE contain duplicate, redundant in-
formation and so any translation that was a sub-
string of another is removed (3).

(1) “Cósta Rı́ceach”,“ADJ”,“Costa Rican”
“Cósta Rı́ceach”,“NOUN”,“Costa Rican”

https://www.tearma.ie/ioslodail/
https://www.tearma.ie/ioslodail/
https://cadhan.com/lsg/index-en.html
https://cadhan.com/lsg/index-en.html
https://www.gaois.ie/bnl/en/
https://www.gaois.ie/bnl/en/
https://github.com/michmech/pota-focal-gluais/
https://github.com/michmech/pota-focal-gluais/


164

(2) “great and small”, “young and old” → “great
and small; young and old”

(3) “birthday”,“birthday (Happy Birthday!)” →
“birthday (Happy Birthday!)”

Following these steps, the corpus was condensed
from 389,424 entries to 201,795 entries.

3 MWE Categorisation

Ideally the lexicon entries would include informa-
tion about the type of MWE. However, there does
not exist an agreed-upon taxonomy of MWEs in
Irish to date, although there has been some re-
search investigating certain categories of MWEs,
including idioms (Nı́ Loingsigh, 2016), light verb
constructions (Bayda, 2015), verb-particle con-
structions (Ó Domhnalláin and Ó Baoill, 1975),
and other idiosyncratic constructions (Stenson,
1981). Throughout the development of the lex-
icon, some prospective MWE categories became
easily identifiable through the POS tags of their
headwords (e.g. Nominal MWEs). Other cate-
gories were determined following examples of cat-
egorisation efforts in other languages.

In her work on creating a taxonomy of Spanish
MWEs, Parra Escartı́n (2015) describes the var-
ious taxonomy schemes of MWEs that have been
suggested, such as those of Sag et al. (2002), Bald-
win and Kim (2010) and Ramisch (2015). These
taxonomies make distinctions between lexicalised
phrases and institutionalised phrases. Lexicalised
phrases are expressions which are idiosyncratic on
a lexical, semantic or syntactic level; institution-
alised phrases are considered MWEs based on sta-
tistical idiosyncrasy alone.

These taxonomies also distinguish between
fixed expressions, semi-fixed expressions and syn-
tactically flexible expressions. We define these
terms depending on the variability of the MWE
entries as they occur in the manually annotated
sample of the lexicon. Fixed expressions do not
allow for any variation or inflection, and include
fixed idioms such as those listed in section 3.3, as
well compound prepositions. Semi-fixed expres-
sions allow some degree of inflection, but the word
order is fixed and there are no gaps, e.g. nominal
MWEs, some idiomatic constructions with “be”.
Non-fixed or flexible expressions can be discon-
tinuous, word order may be flexible and elements
of the expression may inflect. These expressions
include light verb constructions, verb-particle con-

structions, inherently adpositional verbs and cer-
tain idioms.

The initial approach that we take is to broadly
categorise Irish MWEs into non-verbal and ver-
bal MWEs. The categories of verbal MWEs were
chosen to align with the PARSEME Annotation
Guidelines 1.1 (Ramisch et al., 2018). However,
we note that there are a number of MWEs for Irish
that do not fall neatly into the PARSEME cate-
gories (see section 3.2).

3.1 Non-verbal MWEs
Compound Prepositions Some simple preposi-
tions can combine with a noun to form compound
prepositions. These compound prepositions act as
fixed lexical items and do not inflect.

(4) i ndiaidh ‘after’

Nominal MWEs Nominal MWEs (NMWEs)
are multiword terms that include named entities,
noun-noun compounds, and noun-adjective and
noun-prepositional phrase constructions. The ma-
jority of the MWE entries in our lexicon appear to
be N-N compounds or N-Adj compounds, due in
part to the inclusion of the relatively large Tearma
database of Irish terminology.

(5) garrán préachán
grove of-rooks
‘rookery’

3.2 Verbal MWEs
Light Verb Constructions Light Verb Con-
structions (LVCs) consist of a verb and a noun, the
latter of which contributes most of the semantics
within the construction. These constructions can
be accompanied by a necessary preposition (see
Inherently Adpositional Verbs below).

(6) Rinne Sorcha iarracht air.
(make-PA Sarah attempt on-it)
‘Sarah tried it.’

Verb-Particle Constructions Verb-Particle
Constructions (VPCs) are expressions consisting
of a verb and a particle, that is, a preposition or
adverb, that changes the meaning of the verb.

(7) tabhair ‘give’
tabhair amach ‘complain’

(8) buail ‘hit’
buail le ‘meet’

The change in the meaning may be significant
or subtle.



165

Inherently Adpositional Verbs Inherently Ad-
positional Verbs (IAVs) are constructions defined
in the PARSEME Annotation Guidelines. These
are verb-adposition constructions, where the verb
must take a certain adposition.

(9) maith (rud) do (duine) ‘forgive (something)
of (someone)’

This construction does not exactly align with
the PARSEME Guidelines, given that the addi-
tional adposition occasionally appears to change
the meaning of the construction.

(10) cuir sı́os ‘put down’
cuir sı́os ar ‘describe’

It could be argued that the VPC cuir sı́os already
allows for this meaning, but never occurs without
the adposition in this context.

Idiomatic Constructions with “Be” Irish has
two verbs which translate to the English verb “be”.
The copular verb in Irish (is) is used to indicate
states, emotions, etc., while the substantive verb
(tá) is used in periphrastic aspectual constructions
(Ó hUallacháin and Ó Murchú, 1981). Both of
these verbs are often used in idiomatic construc-
tions (BE-idioms), which function as a unit in
Irish.

(11) Is maith liom tae.
(COP good with-me tea)
‘I like tea.’

(12) Tá áthas orm.
(be happiness on-me)
‘I am happy.’

While we’ve termed these constructions ‘Id-
iomatic constructions with “be”’, they do not
align with the PARSEME category of verbal id-
ioms, and are potentially a new category of verbal
MWEs.

3.3 Idioms
Idioms as a category of MWE can fall under both
verbal and non-verbal MWEs, depending on what
the headword is deemed to be. This category al-
lows for expressions that are clearly idiomatic or
idiosyncratic, but do not follow a syntactic pat-
tern as described above. They also include vari-
ous fixed, idiomatic expressions such as proverbs,
sayings and non-decomposable expressions.

(13) Idir dhá thine Bhealtaine
(between two fire May-GEN)
‘Between a rock and a hard place
(lit. between two May fires)’

(14) Gearraı́onn beirt bóthar ‘Easier with two’
(lit. Two shorten the road)

(15) (a) sheacht mı́le dı́cheall ‘(his) very best’
(lit. his best seven thousand)

3.4 Institutionalised Phrases
Institutionalised Phrases (IPs) are described in
Sag et al. (2002) as expressions that are statisti-
cally idiosyncratic. IPs are distinct from collo-
cations in that IPs discount compositional phrases
that are predictably frequent for non-linguistic rea-
sons. While these expressions are not idiomatic
or non-compositional, their frequency in language
creates a strong association between the concept
and the expression.

(16) aire agus forcamás ‘care and attention’

(17) ceathrar déag ‘fourteen’

Given that the only defining characteristics of
institutionalised phrases are their statistical fre-
quency and lack of idiomaticity, distinguishing be-
tween IPs and collocations or other lexical chunks
that may be included in a dictionary proved chal-
lenging when annotating the sample corpus.

4 Manually Annotated Sample

In order to assess the quality of the lexicon, 530
entries were randomly selected from the lexicon
and examined. Missing POS and translations were
added, erroneous headwords were corrected and
the entries were labelled with a MWE category
and whether they were fixed expressions (f ), semi-
fixed expressions (s) or non-fixed or flexible ex-
pressions (n). Table 1 demonstrates how the sam-
ple MWEs were categorised. The highest propor-
tion of MWEs are Nominal MWEs, mostly origi-
nating from the Tearma corpus.

The manual annotation revealed some bugs:

Headwords As mentioned in Section 2, not ev-
ery resource had headword information, and the
default token value assigned to this field was
sometimes incorrect. Moreover, there was a lack
of consistency in choice of headword across dif-
ferent resources - with some resources choosing
headwords of different POS type for different ex-
pressions.



166

Compound Prepositions 2
Nominal MWEs 377
Light Verb Constructions 30
Verb-Particle Constructions 5
Inherently Adpositional Verbs 17
Constructions with ‘Be’ 2
Idioms 63
Institutional Phrases 31
Non-MWEs 18

Table 1: Categorisation of 530 MWEs

(18) an, an mhainistir (the cloister)
headword should be mhainistir ‘cloister’

(19) caobh, cara caobh (gentle friend)
headword should be cara ‘friend’

POS tags POS information refers to the POS of
the headword of the MWE entry. Given how some
of the entries did not have a headword, the POS in-
formation is lacking for a number of the sources.
Moreover, the labels used to denote POS informa-
tion varies between sources. We aim to unify all
these labels for the next release of the corpus.

Non-MWEs There were several instances in the
sample that were deemed not to be multiword ex-
pressions – see last row of Table 1. These in-
cluded productive entries, and terms which did not
qualify as institutionalised phrases, whether be-
cause elements of the expression could be easily
replaced by another word (i.e. too productive), or
there were too many non-lexicalised components
included in the entry.

(20) súile silteacha ‘streaming eyes’
(silteacha is a productive adjective that can
be applied to many nouns)

(21) Dá mbeadh cosúlacht ar bith orthu ‘if they
showed any promise’
(Not an idiomatic or statistically idiosyn-
cratic entry)

Productive Entries Many entries, particularly
those extracted from the English-Irish Dictionary,
included non-lexicalised (i.e. non-core) elements
in the expression. As these non-lexicalised ele-
ments were often members of a relatively small
semantic class of words, it is difficult to de-
cide whether these entries should be considered
MWEs. In these contexts, the headword would
gain a different meaning.

(22) gearr ‘cut’
gearr pionós, dualgas, fı́neáil ‘impose a
penalty, duty, fine’

5 Conclusion

We have described the first release of Ilfhocail,
an Irish MWE lexicon. It was compiled semi-
automatically using several lexical resources for
Irish, and currently contains 201,795 entries. Is-
sues discovered through manual annotation of 530
entries will be handled in the second version, e.g.
unifying POS information, removing non-MWEs
and a first attempt at automatic categorisation of
MWE type.

A second contribution of this paper is an ini-
tial attempt at defining a categorisation scheme
for Irish MWEs. This scheme takes categorisa-
tion schemes for other languages as a basis and
modifies them to accommodate the properties of
the Irish language. It is our hope to include Irish
in a future version of the PARSEME Shared Task
on Automatic Identification of Verbal MWEs. To
that end, it is necessary to determine how the
categories of verbal MWEs in Irish align to the
PARSEME Annotation Guidelines2, and whether
these categories must be modified to fit the anno-
tation scheme or vice versa.

Ilfhocail will serve as a useful source of data for
future experiments in Irish NLP. These include au-
tomatic identification of MWEs in the Irish Tree-
banks (Lynn, 2016; Lynn and Foster, 2016), which
will facilitate the development of Irish parsing
technologies, as well as intelligent MWE handling
for improved English-Irish and Irish-English Ma-
chine Translation.

Acknowledgements

The first author’s work is funded by the Irish Gov-
ernment Department of Culture, Heritage and the
Gaeltacht under the GaelTech Project, and is also
supported by Science Foundation Ireland in the
ADAPT Centre (Grant 13/RC/2106) (http://
www.adaptcentre.ie) at Dublin City Uni-
versity. The authors would also like to acknowl-
edge Noah Ó Donnaile for his help with the cre-
ation of this lexicon, particularly in extracting the
entries from the lexical resources.

2https://parsemefr.lif.univ-mrs.fr/
parseme-st-guidelines/1.1/

http://www.adaptcentre.ie
http://www.adaptcentre.ie
https://parsemefr.lif.univ-mrs.fr/parseme-st-guidelines/1.1/
https://parsemefr.lif.univ-mrs.fr/parseme-st-guidelines/1.1/


167

References
Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword

Expressions. Handbook of natural language pro-
cessing, pages 267–285.

Victor Bayda. 2015. Irish constructions with bain. Yn
llawen iawn, yn llawn iaith: Proceedings of the 6th
International Colloquium of Societas Celto-Slavica.
Vol. 7 of Studia Celto-Slavica. Johnston, D., Parina,
E. and Fomin, M. (eds), 7:213–228.

Tomás de Bhaldraithe. 1959. English-Irish Dictionary.
An Gúm, Baile Átha Cliath.

Maria Bloch-Trojnar. 2009. On the Nominal Status of
VNs in Light Verb Constructions in Modern Irish.

R. Jackendoff. 1997. The Architecture of the Language
Faculty. Linguistic inquiry monographs. MIT Press.

Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Federico Sangati,
Carla Parra Escartı́n, Agata Savary, Sascha
Bargmann, and Johanna Monti. 2016. PARSEME
Survey on MWE Resources. pages 2299–2306.

Teresa Lynn. 2016. Irish Dependency Treebanking and
Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Dublin City University, Mac-
quarie University.

Teresa Lynn and Jennifer Foster. 2016. Universal de-
pendencies for Irish. In Celtic Language Technology
Workshop, July, pages 79–92, Paris.

Teresa Lynn, Kevin Scannell, and Eimear Maguire.
2015. Minority language twitter: Part-of-speech
tagging and analysis of irish tweets. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text,
pages 1–8, Beijing, China. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Stella Markantonatou, Carlos Ramisch, Agata Savary,
and Veronika Vincze, editors. 2017. Proceedings of
the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE
2017). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Valencia, Spain.

Ruslan Mitkov, Violeta Seretan, and Gloria Cor-
pas Pastor, editors. 2017. Proceedings of The 3rd
Workshop on Multi-word Units in Machine Transla-
tion and Translation Technology (MUMTTT 2017).
Editions Tradulex, Geneva.

Katie Nı́ Loingsigh. 2016. Tiomsú agus Rangú i
mBunachar Sonraı́ ar Chnuasach Nathanna Gaeilge
as Saothar Pheadair Uı́ Laoghaire. Ph.D. thesis.

Katie Nı́ Loingsigh and Brian Ó Raghallaigh. 2016.
Starting from Scratch – The Creation of Irish-
language Idiom Database. pages 726–734.

Joakim Nivre, Mitchell Abrams, Željko Agić, Lars
Ahrenberg, Lene Antonsen, Katya Aplonova,
Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Gashaw Arutie, Masayuki

Asahara, Luma Ateyah, Mohammed Attia, Aitz-
iber Atutxa, Liesbeth Augustinus, Elena Bad-
maeva, Miguel Ballesteros, Esha Banerjee, Sebas-
tian Bank, Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Victoria Bas-
mov, John Bauer, Sandra Bellato, Kepa Bengoetxea,
Yevgeni Berzak, Irshad Ahmad Bhat, Riyaz Ah-
mad Bhat, Erica Biagetti, Eckhard Bick, Rogier
Blokland, Victoria Bobicev, Carl Börstell, Cristina
Bosco, Gosse Bouma, Sam Bowman, Adriane
Boyd, Aljoscha Burchardt, Marie Candito, Bernard
Caron, Gauthier Caron, Gülşen Cebiroğlu Eryiğit,
Flavio Massimiliano Cecchini, Giuseppe G. A.
Celano, Slavomı́r Čéplö, Savas Cetin, Fabricio
Chalub, Jinho Choi, Yongseok Cho, Jayeol Chun,
Silvie Cinková, Aurélie Collomb, Çağrı Çöltekin,
Miriam Connor, Marine Courtin, Elizabeth David-
son, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Valeria de Paiva,
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Carly Dickerson, Pe-
ter Dirix, Kaja Dobrovoljc, Timothy Dozat, Kira
Droganova, Puneet Dwivedi, Marhaba Eli, Ali
Elkahky, Binyam Ephrem, Tomaž Erjavec, Aline
Etienne, Richárd Farkas, Hector Fernandez Al-
calde, Jennifer Foster, Cláudia Freitas, Katarı́na
Gajdošová, Daniel Galbraith, Marcos Garcia, Moa
Gärdenfors, Sebastian Garza, Kim Gerdes, Filip
Ginter, Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola, Memduh
Gökırmak, Yoav Goldberg, Xavier Gómez Guino-
vart, Berta Gonzáles Saavedra, Matias Grioni, Nor-
munds Grūzı̄tis, Bruno Guillaume, Céline Guillot-
Barbance, Nizar Habash, Jan Hajič, Jan Hajič jr.,
Linh Hà Mỹ, Na-Rae Han, Kim Harris, Dag Haug,
Barbora Hladká, Jaroslava Hlaváčová, Florinel
Hociung, Petter Hohle, Jena Hwang, Radu Ion,
Elena Irimia, O. lájı́dé Ishola, Tomáš Jelı́nek, An-
ders Johannsen, Fredrik Jørgensen, Hüner Kaşıkara,
Sylvain Kahane, Hiroshi Kanayama, Jenna Kan-
erva, Boris Katz, Tolga Kayadelen, Jessica Ken-
ney, Václava Kettnerová, Jesse Kirchner, Kamil
Kopacewicz, Natalia Kotsyba, Simon Krek, Sooky-
oung Kwak, Veronika Laippala, Lorenzo Lam-
bertino, Lucia Lam, Tatiana Lando, Septina Dian
Larasati, Alexei Lavrentiev, John Lee, Phng
Lê H`ông, Alessandro Lenci, Saran Lertpradit, Her-
man Leung, Cheuk Ying Li, Josie Li, Keying
Li, KyungTae Lim, Nikola Ljubešić, Olga Logi-
nova, Olga Lyashevskaya, Teresa Lynn, Vivien
Macketanz, Aibek Makazhanov, Michael Mandl,
Christopher Manning, Ruli Manurung, Cătălina
Mărănduc, David Mareček, Katrin Marheinecke,
Héctor Martı́nez Alonso, André Martins, Jan
Mašek, Yuji Matsumoto, Ryan McDonald, Gus-
tavo Mendonça, Niko Miekka, Margarita Misir-
pashayeva, Anna Missilä, Cătălin Mititelu, Yusuke
Miyao, Simonetta Montemagni, Amir More, Laura
Moreno Romero, Keiko Sophie Mori, Shinsuke
Mori, Bjartur Mortensen, Bohdan Moskalevskyi,
Kadri Muischnek, Yugo Murawaki, Kaili Müürisep,
Pinkey Nainwani, Juan Ignacio Navarro Horñiacek,
Anna Nedoluzhko, Gunta Nešpore-Bērzkalne, Lng
Nguy˜ên Thi., Huy`ên Nguy˜ên Thi. Minh, Vi-
taly Nikolaev, Rattima Nitisaroj, Hanna Nurmi,
Stina Ojala, Adédayo. Olúòkun, Mai Omura, Petya
Osenova, Robert Östling, Lilja Øvrelid, Niko

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7020-2797-0.00001-1
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7020-2797-0.00001-1
https://books.google.ie/books?id=_AkHjNi6qqcC
https://books.google.ie/books?id=_AkHjNi6qqcC
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.1826.3926
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.1826.3926
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W15-4301
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W15-4301
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-17
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-17
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-17
https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:109173
https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:109173
https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:109173


168

Partanen, Elena Pascual, Marco Passarotti, Ag-
nieszka Patejuk, Guilherme Paulino-Passos, Siyao
Peng, Cenel-Augusto Perez, Guy Perrier, Slav
Petrov, Jussi Piitulainen, Emily Pitler, Barbara
Plank, Thierry Poibeau, Martin Popel, Lauma
Pretkalniņa, Sophie Prévost, Prokopis Proko-
pidis, Adam Przepiórkowski, Tiina Puolakainen,
Sampo Pyysalo, Andriela Rääbis, Alexandre Rade-
maker, Loganathan Ramasamy, Taraka Rama, Car-
los Ramisch, Vinit Ravishankar, Livy Real, Siva
Reddy, Georg Rehm, Michael Rießler, Larissa Ri-
naldi, Laura Rituma, Luisa Rocha, Mykhailo Ro-
manenko, Rudolf Rosa, Davide Rovati, Valentin
Ros, ca, Olga Rudina, Jack Rueter, Shoval Sadde,
Benoı̂t Sagot, Shadi Saleh, Tanja Samardžić,
Stephanie Samson, Manuela Sanguinetti, Baiba
Saulı̄te, Yanin Sawanakunanon, Nathan Schnei-
der, Sebastian Schuster, Djamé Seddah, Wolfgang
Seeker, Mojgan Seraji, Mo Shen, Atsuko Shi-
mada, Muh Shohibussirri, Dmitry Sichinava, Na-
talia Silveira, Maria Simi, Radu Simionescu, Katalin
Simkó, Mária Šimková, Kiril Simov, Aaron Smith,
Isabela Soares-Bastos, Carolyn Spadine, Antonio
Stella, Milan Straka, Jana Strnadová, Alane Suhr,
Umut Sulubacak, Zsolt Szántó, Dima Taji, Yuta
Takahashi, Takaaki Tanaka, Isabelle Tellier, Trond
Trosterud, Anna Trukhina, Reut Tsarfaty, Francis
Tyers, Sumire Uematsu, Zdeňka Urešová, Larraitz
Uria, Hans Uszkoreit, Sowmya Vajjala, Daniel van
Niekerk, Gertjan van Noord, Viktor Varga, Eric
Villemonte de la Clergerie, Veronika Vincze, Lars
Wallin, Jing Xian Wang, Jonathan North Washing-
ton, Seyi Williams, Mats Wirén, Tsegay Wolde-
mariam, Tak-sum Wong, Chunxiao Yan, Marat M.
Yavrumyan, Zhuoran Yu, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Amir
Zeldes, Daniel Zeman, Manying Zhang, and Hanzhi
Zhu. 2018. Universal dependencies 2.3. LIN-
DAT/CLARIN digital library at the Institute of For-
mal and Applied Linguistics (ÚFAL), Faculty of
Mathematics and Physics, Charles University.

Carla Parra Escartı́n. 2015. Spanish multiword expres-
sions : Looking for a taxonomy. pages 271–323.

Carlos Ramisch. 2015. Multiword Expressions Ac-
quisition: A Generic and Open Framework, vol-
ume XIV of Theory and Applications of Natural
Language Processing. Springer. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-09207-2.

Carlos Ramisch, Silvio Ricardo Cordeiro, Agata
Savary, Veronika Vincze, Verginica Barbu Mititelu,
Archna Bhatia, Maja Buljan, Marie Candito, Polona
Gantar, Voula Giouli, Tunga Güngör, Abdelati
Hawwari, Uxoa Iñurrieta, Jolanta Kovalevskaitė, Si-
mon Krek, Timm Lichte, Chaya Liebeskind, Jo-
hanna Monti, Carla Parra Escartı́n, Behrang Qasem-
iZadeh, Renata Ramisch, Nathan Schneider, Ivelina
Stoyanova, Ashwini Vaidya, and Abigail Walsh.
2018. Edition 1.1 of the PARSEME Shared Task on
Automatic Identification of Verbal Multiword Ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on
Linguistic Annotation, Multiword Expressions and

Constructions (LAW-MWE-CxG-2018), pages 222–
240, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
pages 1–15.

Agata Savary, Carlos Ramisch, Silvio Ricardo
Cordeiro, Federico Sangati, Veronika Vincze,
Behrang QasemiZadeh, Marie Candito, Fabienne
Cap, Voula Giouli, Ivelina Stoyanova, and Antoine
Doucet. 2017. The PARSEME Shared Task on Au-
tomatic Identification of Verbal Multiword Expres-
sions. Proceedings of The 13th Workshop on Multi-
word Expressions, (Mwe):31–47.

Agata Savary, Carlos Ramisch, Jena D. Hwang, Nathan
Schneider, Melanie Andresen, Sameer Pradhan, and
Miriam R. L. Petruck, editors. 2018. Proceedings of
the Joint Workshop on Linguistic Annotation, Mul-
tiword Expressions and Constructions (LAW-MWE-
CxG-2018). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.

Kevin Scannell. 2014. Statistical models for text nor-
malization and machine translation. In Proceedings
of the First Celtic Language Technology Workshop,
pages 33–40, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics and Dublin City University.

Nancy Stenson. 1981. Studies in Irish syntax. Ars lin-
guistica. Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.

Elaine Uı́ Dhonnchadha and Josef Van Genabith. 2008.
Part-of-Speech Tagging and Partial Parsing for
Irish using Finite-State Transducers and Constraint
Grammar. Ph.D. thesis, Dublin City University.

Arndt Wigger. 2008. Advances in the lexicography of
Modern Irish verbs. pages 233–250.

Tomás Ó Domhnalláin and Dónall Ó Baoill. 1975.
Réamhfhocail le briathra na Gaeilge. Tuarascáil
taighde. Institiúid Teangeolaı́ochta Éireann.

Niall Ó Dónaill. 1977. Foclóir Gailge-Béarla. An
Gúm, An Roinn Oideachas.

Niall Ó Dónaill and Pádraig Ua Maoileoin. 1991. An
Foclóir Beag. An Gúm, Baile Átha Cliath.

C. Ó hUallacháin and M. Ó Murchú. 1981. Irish Gram-
mar. University of Ulster Coleraine.

http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2895
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1182605
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1182605
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09207-2
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09207-2
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09207-2
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09207-2
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w17-1704
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w17-1704
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w17-1704
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45715-1_1
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45715-1_1
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-4900
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-4900
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-4900
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-4900
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W14-4605
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W14-4605
https://books.google.ie/books?id=A9p4AAAAIAAJ
http://doras.dcu.ie/2349/1/PhD{_}Elaine{_}Final.pdf
http://doras.dcu.ie/2349/1/PhD{_}Elaine{_}Final.pdf
http://doras.dcu.ie/2349/1/PhD{_}Elaine{_}Final.pdf
https://books.google.ie/books?id=yseLGQAACAAJ

