




































Code-switching in Irish tweets: A preliminary analysis

Teresa Lynn
ADAPT Centre, School of Computing

Dublin City University
Ireland

teresa.lynn@adaptcentre.ie

Kevin Scannell
Department of Computer Science

Saint Louis University
Missouri, USA

kscanne@gmail.com

Abstract

As is the case with many languages, re-
search into code-switching in Modern Irish
has, until recently, mainly been focused
on the spoken language. Online user-
generated content (UGC) is less restric-
tive than traditional written text, allowing
for code-switching, and as such, provides
a new platform for text-based research in
this field of study. This paper reports on
the annotation of (English) code-switching
in a corpus of 1496 Irish tweets and
provides a computational analysis of the
nature of code-switching amongst Irish-
speaking Twitter users, with a view to
providing a basis for future linguistic and
socio-linguistic studies.

1 Introduction

User-generated content (UGC) provides an insight
into the use of language in an informal setting in
a way that previously was not possible. That is to
say that in the pre-internet era (where most pub-
lished content was curated and edited), text that
was available for analysis was not necessarily re-
flective of everyday language use. User-generated
content, on the other hand, provides a clearer snap-
shot of a living language in natural, everyday use.

Analysis of minority language UGC in partic-
ular provides much insight into the evolution of
these languages in the digital age. In some bilin-
gual environments, the overwhelming dominance
of a majority language can sometimes restrict and
discourage the natural use of a minority language.

c© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

Online environments, on the other hand, can offer
a kind of ‘safe space’ in which these languages can
co-exist and the minority language can thrive. Ad-
ditionally, various interesting linguistic phenom-
ena occur online that may be frowned upon in more
formal settings. The present paper aims to investi-
gate one such phenomenon among Irish-speaking
users of the micro-blogging platform Twitter.

Code-switching occurs whenever a speaker
switches between two (or more) languages in
a multilingual environment. Negative attitudes
towards code-switching have been documented
widely in this field – in particular earlier beliefs
that code-switching indicated a communicative de-
ficiency or lack of mastery of either language. In
fact, the phenomenon is now understood to be in-
dicative of bilingual proficiency (Grosjean, 2010).

Solorio and Liu (2008) note that “when the
country has more than one official language, we
can find instances of code-switching”. Given that
Irish is the first official language of the Republic
of Ireland, with English as the second,1 and given
the well-known existence of code-switching in the
spoken Irish of the Gaeltacht regions (Hickey,
2009), it is unsurprising that Lynn et al. (2015)
and Caulfield (2013, p. 208ff) report that code-
switching is a common feature in Irish UGC. Our
earlier work (Lynn et al., 2015), however, focused
only on a part-of-speech (POS) tagging analysis
of an Irish Twitter data set, without further ex-
ploration of the code-switching phenomenon that
was observed. In fact, the English (code-switched)
segments of tweets were given a general tag that

1Note that English is the more dominant language, with only
17.4% of the population reporting use of Irish outside the
education system http://www.cso.ie/en/media/
csoie/releasespublications/documents/
population/2017/7._The_Irish_language.
pdf

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 32



was also used to label abbreviations, items, out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) tokens and other (non-English)
foreign words.

Our current study is a continuation of our ear-
lier work. We annotate, document, and analyse the
specific nature of code-switching between English
and Irish in our corpus of Irish language tweets
(Lynn et al., 2015). With this we provide a basis
for linguistic research into the way in which Ire-
land’s official languages interact in an online so-
cial context. Our contributions are as follows: (i)
an enhancement of the POS-tagged Twitter corpus
in which English code-switched segments are an-
notated, (ii) a categorisation of the types of code-
switching present in Irish tweets, and (iii) a quan-
titative report as to the relative frequency and use
of English within Irish tweets.

2 Background and Related Work

2.1 Code-switching

Code-switching has been a focus of study for many
years, particularly in the area of bilingualism (e.g.
Espinosa (1917) and Muysken (1995)). Despite
being an early topic of study in the field of com-
putational linguistics (e.g. Joshi (1982)), inter-
est in the computational study of code-switching
has grown substantially in recent years with the
increased availability of online UGC (Solorio et
al., 2014; Molina et al., 2016). This area of
study is applicable to many facets of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP), including automatic lan-
guage identification (Rosner and Farrugia, 2007)
and POS tagging (Solorio and Liu, 2008), for ex-
ample. In fact, Minocha and Tyers (2014) car-
ried out some preliminary analysis on English-
Irish code-switching in the context of automatic
language identification. It is worth noting that the
advances in the area of NLP for UGC represent a
valuable contribution to the field of sociolinguis-
tics, as NLP allows for easier and more efficient
processing of large data sets than traditional man-
ual methods (e.g. Nguyen et al. (2016)).

There is much debate in the literature about
whether the correct umbrella term is code-
switching or code-mixing, or in fact whether both
refer to specific types of switching depending on
where in the sentence it occurs. In our work, we
use the term code-switching to cover all instances
of the linguistic phenomenon that results in mixed-
language text. We divide the instances of code-
switching in Irish tweets into four main types:

Inter-sentential: where the switch occurs at a
sentence or clause boundary:

(1) Má tá AON Gaeilge agat, úsáid ı́! It’s Irish
Language Week.
‘If you speak ANY Irish, use it! It’s Irish Lan-
guage Week.’

Intra-sentential: where the switch occurs
within a sentence or clause:

(2) Ceol álainn ar @johncreedon on
@RTERadio1 now.
‘Lovely music on @johncreedon on
@RTERadio1 now.’

Word-level alternation: where the switch
occurs within a word:

(3) Bhfuil do kid ag mixáil Gaeilge agus
English?
‘Is your kid mixing Irish and English?’

Bilingual text is, strictly-speaking, a special
case of inter-sentential code-switching, in which
the same content is provided in both languages in
a single tweet. This is typical on Twitter for users
whose followers can be divided into two groups –
Irish speakers and non-Irish speakers.2 Bilingual
tweeting aims to be inclusive of a wider audience
along with assisting learners in reading the Irish
content. Due to the prevalence and importance of
such examples, they are given special annotations
in the resources described below.

(4) Happy St Patrick’s Day! La Fhéile Pádraig
sona daoibh!

2.2 Code-switching in Irish
Until recently, investigation into the use of code-
switching in Irish has focused mainly on tran-
scribed speech. In recent work, Nı́ Laoire (2016)
noted that “[code-switching] has been underrep-
resented in Irish language corpora and in linguis-
tic and dialectological description and analysis of
Irish”. In fact, much of the existing literature in
this domain focuses on the impact of English as
a dominant language in a bilingual environment
(e.g. Stenson (1993)), in the context of raising
concerns for the survival of the Irish language. In
2Stenson (1993) refers to the ability of all Irish speakers to
speak English as “Universal Bilingualism”

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 33



the same vein, Hickey (2009) looks at the con-
trast between code-switching and borrowing, and
its potential prevalence amongst the next genera-
tion of native Irish speakers. Her study focuses on
such occurrences in unscripted speech of leaders of
Irish-language pre-schools in Irish-speaking com-
munities. Atkinson and Kelly-Holmes (2011) also
investigate the nature of code-switching in spoken
Irish and took a slightly different angle by look-
ing at the use of English-Irish code-switching in
comedy – with respect to the relationship between
identity and language.

In terms of written text, Bannett Kastor (2008)
provides a summary of the few examples of code-
switching in Irish literature from the 17th-20th
century, which in many cases incidentally can also
be noted as being a conduit for comedy.3 She
notes that “multiliterate texts are constructed de-
liberately so that switch points or other points
of linguistic contact within the text often sig-
nal additional, metaphorical levels of meaning
which are coherent with the theme and/or other as-
pects of the work.” However, such deliberate and
planned code-switching differs from the nature of
the switching behaviour we are concerned with
here.

Interestingly, while code-switching is some-
times regarded in Ireland today (often negatively)
as a ‘modern’ feature of the language, a number
of studies have reported on the prevalence of Latin
code-switching in Medieval Irish manuscripts, re-
flecting the multilingual environment in which me-
dieval Irish monks and scribes worked (Dumville,
1990; Müller, 1999; Stam, 2017). These stud-
ies highlight code-switching as a natural feature of
language use and as a linguistic activity that has
continued across generations and across radically
different linguistic environments. In the most re-
cent study, Stam (2017) remarks, a propos of the
current study, that “it appears that code-switching
in writing and in speech are in some ways compa-
rable, especially in informal textual genres”. In our
current study, we bridge several centuries from the
analysis of medieval Irish-Latin code-switching to
analyse and process Irish-English code-switching
as it is used by today’s Irish language community
online.

3The data studied came from Irish language poetry, drama,
fiction and nonfiction.

2.3 Irish language on social media

Despite a relatively small population of speak-
ers, the Irish language has a strong online pres-
ence on social media platforms such as Facebook,
YouTube, Instagram, Snapchat, and Twitter (Lack-
aff and Moner, 2016). In fact, according to the
Indigenous Tweets website, which curates tweets
from indigenous and minority languages world-
wide, there have been over 3 million tweets sent
in Irish to date.4 With the increased availability
of user-generated Irish language content, it is un-
surprising that there has been an increased inter-
est in the application of technology to analyse Irish
language use online, in order to gain insights into
how the language is used (e.g. POS-tagging (Lynn
et al., 2015), machine translation (Dowling et al.,
2017) and sentiment analysis (Afli et al., 2017)).

3 Code-switching annotation

Of course, in order to carry out an in-depth anal-
ysis of the nature of code-switching amongst Irish
speakers, sufficient data – in terms of quantity and
richness of annotation – must be made available.
Such data generally comes in two main forms.
One is text that is based on recorded and tran-
scribed speech. In terms of recorded speech, one
is more likely to find instances of code-switching
in spoken content that is spontaneous and non-
scripted (such as the data that was used for an
earlier Irish code-switching analysis by Nı́ Laoire
(2016)). Another similarly unedited source is un-
curated text such as that found in UGC, which is
more likely to contain natural examples of code-
switching than standard, well-curated text. In the
following section, we describe the creation of our
data set of tweets, which we have annotated for
code-switching.

3.1 Data Set

Our starting point is the gold standard POS-tagged
corpus of 1537 Irish language tweets from our ear-
lier study (Lynn et al., 2015), which sought to pro-
vide a basis for NLP analysis of the use of the Irish
language online.5

For this current study, we review the tags pre-
viously assigned to English tokens. In the initial
corpus development, English tokens were assigned

4http://indigenoustweets.com, figures as of July
2019.
5Please refer to cited paper for details concerning the POS
tagset for Irish tweets.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 34



the catch-all tag ‘G’ (‘general’), which is also used
to label other foreign words (of which there are a
few, e.g. Japanese), items, and abbreviations. We
refine this annotation by now annotating English
tokens separately.

Annotation takes place at three levels: (i)
Irish part-of-speech tag level: The
POS-tag is changed from ‘G’ to ‘EN’ for all
English tokens. (ii) Code-switching tag
level: The types of code-switching that are
present (if any). As per our description in
Section 2.1, these labels include INTRA (intra-
sentential), INTER (inter-sentential), INTER-
BI (bilingualism for the purposes of providing
one message in both languages) and WORD
(where the word contains code-switched mor-
phemes). (iii) English part-of-speech
tag level: The INTRA tags have been ex-
tended to identify the English POS (e.g. INTRA-V,
INTRA-O, etc). These tags are explained in more
detail in Table 1.

During annotation, we identified 41 tweets in
the Lynn et al. (2015) corpus that contain both En-
glish and Irish words, but for which English was
the matrix language. This type of issue often can
arise within the context of language identification
of tweets that contain instances of code-switching.
As our interest is in English code-switching within
otherwise-Irish language tweets, we have taken the
viewpoint that these are errors in language identifi-
cation, and have removed these examples from the
corpus.

(5) I added a video to a @YouTube playlist
<URL>Sharon Shannon - Geantraı́ na Nol-
lag 2008 - 25-12-08 <URL>

(6) Nuacht is déanaı́ - Twitter Competition - Help
us Reach 20K!

This leaves us with a data set of 1496 tweets an-
notated with POS and the above-mentioned code-
switching tags.

4 Analysis

4.1 Tag distributions

We observe that 254 (16%) of the tweets in the data
set contain some form of code-switching. Firstly, it
is worth looking at the POS tag distribution across
all POS tags in our data:

INTER 412 tokens (representing 43% of the En-
glish tokens) are used in an inter-sentential manner
– that is, as strings of English that form separate
phrases or sentences.

LOL LOL G
- - ,
tell tell EN INTER
ya ya EN INTER
what what EN INTER
- - ,
más má &
féidir féidir N
leatsa le P
foclóir foclóir N
Ioruaise Ioruais N
a a T
sheoladh seol V
chúm chuig P

INTER-BI 246 tokens (26% of the English to-
kens) represent code-switching for the purposes of
providing comprehension for two groups of fol-
lowers (Irish speakers and non-Irish speakers)

Lón lón N
sa i P
Spéı́r spéir N
/ / ,
MEN MEN EN INTER-BI
AT AT EN INTER-BI
LUNCH LUNCH EN INTER-BI
FILM FILM EN INTER-BI

WORD Interestingly, our data only contains two
instances of word level code-switching. This ran
counter to our intuition before examining the cor-
pus data, as examples of this kind are heard in the
spoken language quite frequently. The two tagged
examples both use the Irish emphatic prefix ‘an-’
with an English root: an-talent ‘a lot of talent’;
an-time ‘a great time’. It is possible, of course,
to find other examples of this word level switch-
ing on Twitter by focused searching (e.g. exam-
ples of verbs with the gerund suffix ‘-áil’: creepáil,
buzzáil, textáil, snapchatáil, flirtáil, etc.). How-
ever, our data suggest that the relative frequency
of such types may not be as high as our intuition
leads us to believe.

tá bı́ V
an-talent talent EN WORD
go go P
deo deo N

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 35



agaibh ag P
in i P
Éirinn Éire ˆ

INTRA(+EN-POS) 297 tokens (31% of the En-
glish tokens) are used in an intra-sentential man-
ner, that is to say that these English tokens are
inserted comfortably within the syntax of Irish
phrases. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the EN
POS tags for intra-sentential code-switching. This
feature is of the most interest to us, and is therefore
described in more detail in the next section.

Don’t Don’t EN INTRA-V
forget forget EN INTRA-V
to to EN INTRA-P
use use EN INTRA-V
the the EN INTRA-D
cúpla cúpla D
focal focal N
ag ag P
obair obair N
agus agus &
ar ar P
scoil scoil N

Figure 1: Distribution of INTRA tags, showing the syntactic
role of code-switched tokens. Tag descriptions are given in
Table 1

4.2 Nature of INTRA code-switching in Irish
tweets

One striking outcome of preliminary observations
of this work is the distribution of syntactic patterns
that arise within intra-sentential code-switching
between Irish and English. There is a clear ease
with which English nouns are used to replace
Irish nouns in a single instance. For example
Figiúirı́ nua tally do Chonamara ‘New tally fig-

INTRA+POS POS meaning
INTRA-N Noun
INTRA-V Verb
INTRA-A Adjective
INTRA-P Preposition
INTRA-D Determiner
INTRA-R Adverb
INTRA-! Interjection
INTRA-O Pronoun
INTRA-G General
INTRA-& Conjunction
INTRA-VN Verbal Noun
INTRA-T Particle

Table 1: Explanation of fine-grained (INTRA+) intra-
sentential tags

ures for Connemara’. In this instance, the En-
glish word ‘tally’ is part of a noun compound.6

In Irish, the head of noun compound is the first
noun (figiúirı́ tally) – in English it is the last
(tally figures). In addition, the position of the
adjective nua ‘new’ follows the rules of Irish syn-
tax by following rather than preceding the head
noun. Several similar noun-adjective examples ex-
ist in the corpus: keyboards beag ‘small key-
boards’, podcast úr ‘new podcast’, an album nua
‘the new album’, an stuff corcra ‘the purple
stuff’. It is interesting to note that in these final two
cases, there exist Gaelicized spellings of the code-
switched words, albam and stuif respectively. In
the first case at least, had the Irish form been in-
tended, one would have an t-albam nua to satisfy
Irish grammatical constraints related to the gender
of the noun.

The relative infrequency of intra-sentential verb
usage is particularly interesting when we consider
the variations across English and Irish with respect
to word order (SVO vs VSO). We observe that 5
out of the 34 INTRA-V (English verb) occurrences
occur alone in an Irish context. (e.g. Wish nach
raibh aon obair le déanamh agam ‘Wish I didn’t
have work to do’) All other 29 instances are part
of an Irish string of two or more tokens (e.g. am
éigin an bhliain seo sounds good ‘some time this
year sounds good’). Interestingly, Müller (1999)
observed a similarly rare switching of verbs from
Irish to Latin in historical texts.

6Interestingly, the Gaelicized spelling teailı́ is recorded in dic-
tionaries and is seen occasionally in Irish writing.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 36



4.3 Automatic POS tagging and detection of
code-switching

We also reproduced the automatic POS tagging ex-
periments from Lynn et al. (2015) with the addi-
tion of the EN tag in order to evaluate the impact
of the slightly richer tagset on tagger performance,
and to assess this as an approach to detecting code-
switched segments. Due to the relative infrequency
of code-switching types (INTRA, INTER, INTER-
BI, WORD), we do not yet have enough data to
train an effective tagger for this level of annotation,
so the results below involve only the introduction
of the tag EN.

In Table 2, the results given for the models Base-
Morf and NormMorf (using the Morfette tagger
of Chrupala et al. (2008)) and ArkLemma#URL@
(using the ARK tagger of Gimpel et al. (2011)) are
the same as those of Lynn et al. (2015), to which
we refer the reader for full experimental details.
The results given with the suffix +EN repeat the
same experiments but this time based on the train-
ing and test data that we have retagged, using the
EN tag for code-switched tokens. Given the rela-
tive infrequency of the EN tag in the overall cor-
pus, it is not surprising that the results change only
slightly. The slight improvements coming from the
introduction of the EN tag might be explained in
part by the use of the G tag as a kind of “catch-
all”, making it difficult for the tagger to learn gen-
eralizations over examples of G tags. For exam-
ple, in the original training corpus without the EN
tag, there many sequences of two or more consecu-
tive G tags. As a consequence, the taggers of Lynn
et al. (2015) sometimes incorrectly assign G tags
to one or more Irish words following an English
word, but this seems to happen less often after in-
troduction of the separate EN tag.

5 Inter-annotator Agreement

In order to assess consistency, levels of bias, and
reliability of the annotated data, we carried out an
Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) study. There are
a number of metrics used widely to calculate IAA
in classification tasks (Artstein and Poesio, 2008).
In this study, we report IAA between two annota-
tors using Cohen’s Kappa (Cohen, 1960):

κ =
P (A)− P (E)
1− P (E)

where P (A) is the proportion of observed agree-
ment among annotators, and P (E) is the propor-

Training Data Dev Test
Baseline

Rule-Based Tagger 85.07 83.51
Morfette

BaseMorf 86.77 88.67
BaseMorf+EN 87.16 88.64
NormMorf 87.94 88.74
NormMorf+EN 88.06 89.22

ARK
ArkLemma#URL@ 91.46 91.89
ArkLemma#URL@+EN 91.23 91.98

Table 2: Changes in POS-tagging accuracy following sepa-
rate labelling of English tokens (+EN indicates new experi-
ments).

tion of expected agreement. By correcting for
P (E), this measurement accounts for the fact that
the annotators are expected to agree a proportion of
times just by chance. Di Eugenio and Glass (2004)
present the calculation of Cohen’s P (E) as:

P (E) =
∑

j
pj,1 × pj,2

where pj,a is the overall proportion of items as-
signed to a label j by annotator a.

For this study, we presented all 1496 tweets
to the annotators. Annotators first received in-
structions to annotate all English tokens as ‘EN’.
For each English token, according to the code-
switching categories described in Section 2.1, a
new tag was to be inserted in the next column (IN-
TER, INTER-BI, INTRA or WORD). We refer to
these as coarse-grained tags. For each INTRA tag
we also asked the annotators to identify the POS-
tag for the English token (e.g INTRA-N (noun),
INTRA-V (verb), etc). We refer to these as fine-
grained tags. 943 tokens in the corpus are English
tokens, and as such our kappa score is based on the
agreement of the labelling of these tokens.

We achieved a kappa agreement rate of 0.69 on
coarse-grained tags and 0.74 on fine-grained tags.
On closer inspection, there were a couple of clear
explanations for the coarse-grained tagging dis-
agreements. Some cases involved confusion be-
tween INTER vs INTER-BI, and INTER vs IN-
TRA. As an instance of INTER usually consists of
a string of tokens (e.g. ‘a rock and a hard place’),
a single misinterpretation can lead to multiple in-
stances of tag disagreement.

We use Landis and Koch (1977)’s metric shown
in Table 3 for interpretation of our Kappa results.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 37



Kappa value Strength of Agreement
< 0.00 None
0.00 – 0.20 Slight
0.21 – 0.40 Fair
0.41 – 0.60 Moderate
0.61 – 0.80 Substantial
0.81 – 1.00 Almost Perfect

Table 3: Landis and Koch’s interpretation of Cohens’s Kappa

While our results are regarded as substantial agree-
ment we will take this as an opportunity to identify
the areas of confusion and to revise our annotation
guidelines for future labelling work.

6 Conclusion and Future Directions

We have reported on the enhancement of a corpus
of POS-tagged Irish tweets with code-switching
annotations and provided a categorisation of code-
switching types of Irish UGC. We have also pro-
vided a quantitative report with respect to the dis-
tribution of code-switched tweets and tag types in
the corpus.7

We have also reported more accurate automatic
POS tagging results for these tweets, based on the
inclusion of updated EN labels.

Our study has revealed that Irish speaking on-
line users switch effortlessly and effectively be-
tween Irish and English. This ease demonstrates
the clever mix across the syntax paradigms of both
languages and supports the argument that code-
switching is indeed a reflection of advanced gram-
matical ability. The various different types of
code-switching employed suggested different mo-
tivations for this linguistic behaviour.

In terms of future work, the natural progression
for this study would be to increase the size of the
dataset so that more instances of code-switching
can be observed and analysed. Of course, after
having observed the disagreements amongst anno-
tators in our IAA study, we will need to update the
annotation guideline to make the instructions much
clearer and to avoid ambiguity.

In future work, we would also like to take a
more socio-linguistic approach to our analysis.
We would like to investigate users’ motivation for
code-switching and assess whether linguistic pat-
terns provide clues as to why and when English

7Available to download from https://github.com/
tlynn747/IrishTwitterPOS/tree/master/
Data/morfette-CS

text is inserted into Irish tweets. For example,
in some instances, we observe that English noun
phrases are used where there is no official Irish
term for a concept, and in other instances where
there is an official Irish term that may not be known
to the speaker (or if known, not preferred). This
type of information would be a useful source of
data for language planning and terminology devel-
opment.

Given that Stam (2017) notes that “it appears
that code-switching in medieval Irish texts may
be both a functional communicative device used
to structure a text and an unconscious expression
of bilingual identity for a like-minded audience”,
we believe our corpus will provide an interesting
dataset to help identify whether this holds true to-
day.

One likely future application of this corpus is
to build a tool to automatically identify code-
switching in Irish online content. Despite it being
a challenging task, there has been much progress
in this area, with notable impact on a number of
downstream applications, as outlined by Çetinoğlu
et al. (2016). Yet, we note that our own data set
is still not large enough to support state-of-the-art
data-driven approaches. Further development of
this corpus is therefore required.

In addition, we see this data set as a starting
point for a treebank of Irish user-generated con-
tent. Parsing code-switched text is an area of re-
search attracting much attention, and for this rea-
son we have labelled the POS-tag of the switched
tokens. Again, this is simply a starting point and
much larger data set will be required before a data-
driven system can be developed.

7 Acknowledgements

The first author’s work is funded by the Irish
Government Department of Culture, Heritage and
the Gaeltacht under the GaelTech Project, and is
also supported by Science Foundation Ireland in
the ADAPT Centre (Grant 13/RC/2106) at Dublin
City University.

8 Bibliographical References

References
Afli, Haithem, Sorcha McGuire, and Andy Way. 2017.

Sentiment translation for low-resourced languages:
Experiments on Irish General Election tweets. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics, Budapest, Hungary.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 38



Artstein, Ron and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596, December.

Atkinson, David and Helen Kelly-Holmes. 2011.
Codeswitching, identity and ownership in Irish radio
comedy. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(1):251 – 260.

Bannett Kastor, Tina. 2008. Code-mixing in biliter-
ate and multiliterate Irish literary texts. Asociación
Española de Estudios Irlandeses (AEDEI), 3:29–41.

Caulfield, John. 2013. A social network analysis of
Irish language use in social media. Ph.D. thesis,
Cardiff University.

Çetinoğlu, Özlem, Sarah Schulz, and Ngoc Thang Vu.
2016. Challenges of computational processing of
code-switching. In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Computational Approaches to Code Switch-
ing, pages 1–11, Austin, Texas, November. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Chrupala, Grzegorz, Georgiana Dinu, and Josef van
Genabith. 2008. Learning morphology with Mor-
fette. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC
2008, 26 May - 1 June 2008, Marrakech, Morocco.

Cohen, J. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for Nom-
inal Scales. Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement, 20(1):37.

Di Eugenio, Barbara and Michael Glass. 2004. The
Kappa statistic: a second look. Computational Lin-
guistics, 30(1):95–101, March.

Dowling, Meghan, Teresa Lynn, and Andy Way. 2017.
A crowd-sourcing approach for translations of mi-
nority language user-generated content (UGC). In
Proceedings of The First Workshop on Social Media
and User Generated Content Machine Translation,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Dumville, David. 1990. Latin and Irish in the An-
nals of ulster, a.d. 431- 1050. Histories and Pseudo-
Histories of the Insular Middle Ages, pages 320–341.

Espinosa, Aurelio, 1917. The Pacific Ocean in History,
chapter Speech Mixture in New Mexico: the influ-
ence of English language on New Mexican Spanish.
New York MacMillan.

Gimpel, Kevin, Nathan Schneider, Brendan O’Connor,
Dipanjan Das, Daniel Mills, Jacob Eisenstein,
Michael Heilman, Dani Yogatama, Jeffrey Flanigan,
and Noah A. Smith. 2011. Part-of-speech tagging
for Twitter: Annotation, features, and experiments.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies: Short Papers - Volume 2,
HLT ’11, pages 42–47, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Grosjean, François. 2010. Bilingual: Life and Reality.
Harvard University Press.

Hickey, Tina. 2009. Code-switching and borrowing in
Irish. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 13(5):670–688.

Joshi, Aravind K. 1982. Processing of sentences with
intra-sentential code-switching. In Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING ’82, Prague, Czechoslovakia,
July 5-10, 1982, pages 145–150.

Lackaff, Derek and William J. Moner. 2016. Local lan-
guages, global networks: Mobile design for minority
language users. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM In-
ternational Conference on the Design of Communi-
cation, SIGDOC ’16, pages 14:1–14:9, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Landis, J. Richard and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
In Biometrics, volume 33, pages 159–174. Interna-
tional Biometric Society.

Nı́ Laoire, Siobhán, 2016. Irish-English Code-
switching: A Sociolinguistic Perspective, pages 81–
106. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London.

Lynn, Teresa, Kevin Scannell, and Eimear Maguire.
2015. Minority Language Twitter: Part-of-Speech
Tagging and Analysis of Irish Tweets. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Workshop on Noisy User-generated
Text (W-NUT 2015), Beijing, China.

Minocha, Akshay and Francis M. Tyers. 2014. Subseg-
mental language detection in Celtic language text.
In Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology
Workshop (CLTW), co-located with COLING 2014.

Molina, Giovanni, Nicolas Rey-Villamizar, Thamar
Solorio, Fahad AlGhamdi, Mahmoud Ghoneim, Ab-
delati Hawwari, and Mona Diab. 2016. Overview
for the Second shared task on language identification
in code-switched data. EMNLP 2016.

Muysken, Pieter. 1995. One speaker, two languages:
Cross-disciplinary perspectives on code-switching.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

Müller, Nicole. 1999. Kodewechsel in der
irischen Übersetzungsliteratur: exempla et desider-
ata. Übersetzung, Adaptation und Akkulturation im
insularen Mittelalter, pages 73–86.

Nguyen, Dong, A. Seza Doğruöz, Carolyn P. Rosé, and
Franciska de Jong. 2016. Computational Sociolin-
guistics: A Survey. Comput. Linguist., 42(3):537–
593, September.

Rosner, Mike and Paulseph-John Farrugia. 2007. A
tagging algorithm for mixed language identification
in a noisy domain. In INTERSPEECH, pages 190–
193. ISCA.

Solorio, Thamar and Yang Liu. 2008. Part-of-speech
tagging for English-Spanish code-switched text. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’08,
pages 1051–1060, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 39



Solorio, Thamar, Elizabeth Blair, Suraj Mahar-
jan, Steven Bethard, Mona Diab, Mahmoud
Gohneim, Abdelati Hawwari, Fahad AlGhamdi, Ju-
lia Hirschberg, Alison Chang, and Pascale Fung.
2014. Overview for the First shared task on lan-
guage identification in code-switched data. In Pro-
ceedings of The First Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Code Switching, held in conjunction
with EMNLP 2014., pages 62–72, Doha, Qatar. ACL.

Stam, Nike. 2017. A typology of code-switching in the
Commentary to the Félire Óengusso. Ph.D. thesis,
Utrecht University.

Stenson, Nancy. 1993. English influence on Irish: The
last 100 years. Journal of Celtic linguistics, 2:107–
128.

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 40


