




































NEC TM DATA PROJECT 

Alexandre Helle 

Pangeanic / B.I. Europe 

PangeaMT Technologies Division 

Valencia, Spain 

a.helle@pangeanic.com 

Manuel Herranz 

Pangeanic / B.I. Europe 

PangeaMT Technologies Division 

Valencia, Spain 

m.herranz@pangeanic.com 

 

 Abstract 

The objective of project NEC TM Data1 is 

to organise unexploited national bilingual 

assets that can be used as open data and 

general data for machine learning, in order 

to lower translation costs at a national 

level and across member states. It runs a 

study on the expenditure at the national 

level on translation contracts, as well as at 

the regional and municipal levels. The 

software will help member states central-

ise these language assets with the NEC TM 

database, following industry best prac-

tices. 

NEC TM is based on the ElasticSearch2 

(Gormley, 2015) ActivaTM server which 

is a centralised translation memory (TM) 

server independent of any computer-as-

sisted translation (CAT) tool for efficient 

data sharing, TM matching, TM retrieval, 

and domain categorisation of resources. In 

short, ActivaTM separates the need of 

every CAT tool to have its own TM server. 

It is possible to store bilingual assets and 

later retrieve them through any CAT tool 

using the API calls to NEC TM Translators 

can translate and access each other’s work 

simultaneously from different CAT tools. 

ActivaTM is the basis for the NEC TM 

(fork-out) for the scope of this project. It 

has been selected as a CEF (Connecting 

Europe Facility) project by the European 

Commission as the database of choice to 

provide unified translation memory 

                                                 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. 

services to EU public administrations and 

collect and build bilingual big data from 

public translation contracts. 

Each European country will be able to in-

stall their own NEC TM and new transla-

tion contracts from translation companies 

will benefit from fuzzy matching analysis 

and will be able to work online and con-

nect to each national NEC TM server. 

Translation data will be categorised in 

NEC TM, and a connection provided to 

eTranslation and ELRC. 

The consortium for the project is com-

posed by Pangeanic, Tilde, Ciklopea and 

Secretary of State for Digital Progress 

(SEAD) of Spain. 

The NEC TM Data project consortium ad-

vocates for the facilitation of a single dig-

ital market. It will act as a meeting point 

for European data gathering efforts and 

the collection of national digital big data. 

By building a data bridge between public 

administrations and translation vendors, 

NEC TM Data project will promote the 

free flow of data between Public Admin-

istrations and translation professionals. 

References 

Gormley, Clinton, and Zachary Tong. 2015. Elas-

ticsearch: The definitive guide: A distributed real-

time search and analytics engine. O'Reilly Media, 

Inc. 

1 Action No. 2017-EU-IA-0149 shall run from 

01/09/2018 until 28/02/2020 
2 https://www.elastic.co/es/products/elasticsearch 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 109


