



















































Harmonizing Different Lemmatization Strategies for Building a Knowledge Base of Linguistic Resources for Latin


Proceedings of the 13th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 71–80
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

71

Harmonizing Different Lemmatization Strategies for Building a
Knowledge Base of Linguistic Resources for Latin

Francesco Mambrini, Marco Passarotti
CIRCSE Research Centre

Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore
Largo Gemelli, 1 - 20123 Milan, Italy

{francesco.mambrini}{marco.passarotti}@unicatt.it

Abstract

The interoperability between lemmatized cor-
pora of Latin and other resources that use
the lemma as indexing key is hampered by
the multiple lemmatization strategies that dif-
ferent projects adopt. In this paper we dis-
cuss how we tackle the challenges raised by
harmonizing different lemmatization criteria
in a project that aims to connect linguistic
resources for Latin using the Linked Data
paradigm. The paper introduces the architec-
ture supporting an open-ended, lemma-based
Knowledge Base, built to make textual and
lexical resources for Latin interoperable. Par-
ticularly, the paper describes the inclusion into
the Knowledge Base of its lexical basis, of a
word formation lexicon and of a lemmatized
and syntactically annotated corpus.

1 Introduction

In spite of the growth in the quantity and cover-
age of linguistic resources for several languages,
the greatest part of these resources are still not in-
teroperable. Lack of interoperability is an issue
that severely limits their potential for exploitation
and use. Indeed, linking linguistic resources to
one another would maximize their contribution to,
and use in linguistic analysis at multiple levels, be
those lexical, morphological, syntactic, semantic
or pragmatic.

Interlinking the tremendous wealth of linguistic
(meta)data accumulated in more than half a cen-
tury of Computational Linguistics and empirical
study of language is one of the main challenges
of the present time (Chiarcos et al., 2012, p. 1).
However, the task is not straightforward, in partic-
ular on account of the existence of several differ-
ent formalisms (e.g. various annotation schemas)
or different conceptual models (e.g. different PoS
tagsets) that each project may use to represent lin-

guistic data and which are often incompatible be-
tween systems (van Erp, 2012, p. 58).

Part-of-Speech (PoS) tagging and lemmatiza-
tion are key annotation tasks that are often per-
formed to produce empirical data for research on
linguist problems, to train stochastic Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) tools or to support the
automatic processing of higher annotation lev-
els (like, for instance, syntactic parsing). Espe-
cially for highly inflected languages (like Latin),
harmonization of lemmatization and PoS tagging
strategies could already promote joint exploita-
tion, querying and interlinking of several available
resources (see Section 2). Instead, annotated cor-
pora as well as lexical resources and NLP tools
show frequent problems of mismatch (see Section
3.1).

In this paper we discuss how we tackle the chal-
lenges raised by harmonizing different lemmati-
zation criteria in the LiLa: Linking Latin project,
which aims to make resources for Latin interop-
erable.1 To this aim, the LiLa project builds a
Knowledge Base of linguistic resources based on
the Linked Data paradigm, i.e. a collection of sev-
eral data sets described using the same vocabulary
and linked together.2 In the LiLa Knowledge Base
(henceforth LiLa), lemmas are used as a pivotal
node in a dense network of linguistic information,
making lexical resources, NLP tools and annotated
(at least, lemmatized and PoS-tagged) corpora in-
teract. To this end, it is crucial to harmonize the
different lemmatization strategies adopted so far
in the currently available linguistic resources for
Latin.

The LiLa project responds to the growing need
in the fields of Classics, Humanities Computing
and Computational Linguistics to create an inter-

1https://lila-erc.eu
2See Tim Berners-Lee’s note at https://www.w3.

org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html.

https://lila-erc.eu
https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html


72

operable ecosystem of resources and NLP tools for
Latin. In particular, the work of harmonization of
lemmatizations for Latin is motivated by two main
reasons that make Latin an optimal use case: (a)
the diachrony and diversity of the language present
complex challenges for NLP, especially with re-
gard to the portability of the tools across different
eras, genres and domains; (b) an interconnected
network of the numerous linguistic resources cur-
rently available for Latin would greatly support a
large and diverse community made of historians,
philologists, archaeologists and literary scholars,
whose research work is strictly bound to the em-
pirical evidence provided (also) by textual data.

This paper discusses the results of a first at-
tempt to: (a) create and organize a collection of
lemmas that would serve as a “hub” point for dif-
ferent resources; (b) link one annotated corpus of
Latin texts to it, by solving the different harmo-
nization problems. After providing a brief sum-
mary of the linguistic resources currently available
for Latin (Section 2), we describe the LiLa Knowl-
edge Base, particularly discussing the harmoniza-
tion process of the different annotation strategies
concerning lemmatization for Latin (Section 3).
The inclusion into the Knowledge Base of its fun-
damental lexical basis, of a word formation lexi-
con and of a syntactically annotated corpus (a de-
pendency treebank) is described and evaluated in
Section 4. Finally, Section 5 discusses a number
of open challenges to be addressed by the LiLa
project in the near future.

2 Linguistic Resources for Latin

A huge amount of Latin texts is currently avail-
able in digital format. Among the most prominent
providers and collections of digital texts in Latin
are the Perseus Digital Library at Tufts University
in Boston, MA,3 the Open Greek and Latin project
in Leipzig, Germany,4 the Laboratoire d’Analyse
Statistique des Langues Anciennes (LASLA) in
Liège, Belgium,5 the Patrologia Latina database,6

the digital archive of Latin poetry Musisque De-
oque,7 the collection of Medieval Italian Latinity
ALIM,8 and the Monumenta Germaniae Histor-

3http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/
4https://www.dh.uni-leipzig.de/wo/

projects/open-greek-and-latin-project/
5http://web.philo.ulg.ac.be/lasla/
6http://pld.chadwyck.com/
7http://www.mqdq.it/
8http://www.alim.dfll.univr.it/

ica.9

Despite such a large availability, only a few
Latin texts are currently enhanced with linguis-
tic annotation, while most of them still lack any
linguistic tagging at all. In particular, three tree-
banks are currently available for Latin, all fea-
turing also a version included in the Universal
Dependencies (UD) collection.10 These are the
Index Thomisticus Treebank (IT-TB) (Passarotti,
2009), based on the works of Thomas Aquinas, the
Latin Dependency Treebank (LDT) (Bamman and
Crane, 2011), including texts of the Classical era,
and the PROIEL corpus (Pragmatic Resources in
Old Indo-European Languages), which features
the syntactic annotation of the oldest extant ver-
sions of the New Testament in Indo-European lan-
guages and Latin texts of both the Classical and
Late eras (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008). The size of
these treebanks is presently around 350,000 anno-
tated words for the IT-TB, 55,000 for the LDT and
200,000 for the Latin section of the PROIEL cor-
pus.

In regards to Latin digital lexical resources,
many Latin dictionaries and lexica are today avail-
able in digital format. Some of the most impor-
tant are the Lewis-Short dictionary available at
Perseus, the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae by the
Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften in Mu-
nich,11 and the Neulateinische Wortliste by Johann
Ramminger.12

The availability of Latin treebanks made it
possible to induce subcategorization lexica from
the IT-TB (IT-VaLex) (McGillivray and Passarotti,
2009) and from the LDT (VaLex) (McGillivray,
2013). Latin Vallex is a recently created lexical
resource for Latin consisting in a semantic-based
valency lexicon built in conjunction with the se-
mantic and pragmatic annotation of the IT-TB and
the LDT (Passarotti et al., 2016). Presently, Latin
Vallex includes around 1,350 lexical entries.

The Latin WordNet (LWN) (Minozzi, 2010) was
built in the context of the MultiWordNet project
(Pianta et al., 2002), whose aim was to build
a number of semantic networks for specific lan-
guages aligned with the synsets of the Prince-
ton WordNet (PWN) (Fellbaum, 2012). The
language-specific synsets were built by importing

9http://www.dmgh.de/
10https://universaldependencies.org/
11http://www.thesaurus.badw.de/
12http://www.lrz-muenchen.de/

˜ramminger/

http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/
https://www.dh.uni-leipzig.de/wo/projects/open-greek-and-latin-project/
https://www.dh.uni-leipzig.de/wo/projects/open-greek-and-latin-project/
http://web.philo.ulg.ac.be/lasla/
http://pld.chadwyck.com/
http://www.mqdq.it/
http://www.alim.dfll.univr.it/
http://www.dmgh.de/
https://universaldependencies.org/
http://www.thesaurus.badw.de/
http://www.lrz-muenchen.de/~ramminger/
http://www.lrz-muenchen.de/~ramminger/


73

the semantic relations among the synsets for En-
glish provided by the PWN. At the moment, the
LWN includes 8,973 synsets and 9,124 lemmas.

The recently built Word Formation Latin (WFL)
lexicon (Litta et al., 2016) describes the Latin
lexicon in terms of derivational morphology, by
connecting lemmas via word formation rules.13

For instance, the noun amator, “lover” is con-
nected to the verb amo, “to love” via a rule that
derives nouns from verbs by adding the agen-
tive/instrumental suffix -tor.

The LiLa project wants to maximize the use of
these (and other) resources for Latin by making
them interoperable, thus allowing to run queries
across linked and distributed resources, for in-
stance making it possible to search in the three
Latin treebanks all the occurrences of verbs fea-
turing a specific (a) dependency relation (source:
treebanks), (b) prefix (source: WFL) and (c) va-
lency frame (source: Latin Vallex), and (d) be-
longing to a particular WordNet synset (source:
LWN).

3 The LiLa Knowledge Base

In this section we present the first steps undertaken
in order to structure the information of the Latin
linguistic resources (and, then, NLP tools) in a
centralized architecture representing the backbone
of the LiLa Knowledge Base.

In order to achieve interoperability between dis-
tributed resources and tools, LiLa makes use of a
set of Semantic Web and Linked Data standards
and practices. These include ontologies to de-
scribe linguistic annotation (OLiA, Chiarcos and
Sukhareva (2015)), corpus annotation (NLP In-
terchange Format (NIF), Hellmann et al. (2013);
CoNLL-RDF, Chiarcos and Fäth (2017)) and lexi-
cal resources (Lemon, Buitelaar et al. (2011); On-
tolex14). Furthermore, following Bird and Liber-
man (2001), the Resource Description Frame-
work (RDF) (Lassila et al., 1998) is used to
encode graph-based data structures to represent
linguistic annotations in terms of triples: (1) a
predicate-property (a relation; in graph terms: a
labeled edge) that connects (2) a subject (a re-
source; in graph terms: a labeled node) with (3)
its object (another resource, or a literal, e.g. a
string). The SPARQL language is used to query
the data recorded in the form of RDF triples

13https://github.com/CIRCSE/WFL
14https://www.w3.org/community/ontolex/

(Prud’Hommeaux et al., 2008).
By applying the principles of Linked Data to

linguistic resources, “it is possible to follow links
between existing resources to find other, related
data and exploit network effects” (Chiarcos et al.,
2013, p. iii). The Linguistic Linked Open Data
cloud (LLOD) is a good example of a set of linked
linguistic resources.15

Publishing linguistic resources using Linked
Data allows existing resources to be connected,
thereby creating a web of linguistic data, which
supports complex querying across different and
distributed resources. Consequently, Linked Data
is at the core of recent research efforts in lin-
guistics, like the Open Linguistic Working Group
(OLWG).16 Moreover, applying the Linked Data
paradigm to linguistic data enables to connect lin-
guistics to other disciplines and, ultimately, to
the world. As a matter of fact, Linked Data has
achieved success in a wide variety of domains, like
geography (Goodwin et al., 2008), biomedicine
(Ashburner et al., 2000) and government data.17

3.1 Linking Through Lemmatization

Like for many languages, modern and early-
modern Latin dictionaries index each lexical entry
using a canonical form known as the lemma. Se-
lecting the canonical forms is a fundamental an-
notation step, which tends to follow a standard-
ized series of conventions (e.g. the form in nom-
inative singular for nouns, or the first person of
present tense for verbs). Thesauri, including the
most modern ones like the LWN, organize the lex-
icon by collecting all related entries, and use the
canonical form to index them; so, for instance,
the synset n#07202206 of the LWN, glossed as
“a female human offspring”, includes the nouns
with lemmas: filia, “daughter”, nata, “daughter”
and puella, “girl”. Similarly, other resources, like
word formation based or valency lexica, use lem-
mas to group together entries that share certain
features, like derivative morphemes or valency ar-
guments.

Lemmas are also used to enable lexical search in
corpora, given the very rich inflectional morphol-
ogy of Latin; a regular Latin verb, for instance, can
have up to 130 forms (not including the nominal
inflection of the participles or gerundives), with

15http://linguistic-lod.org/llod-cloud
16http://linguistics.okfn.org
17https://data.gov.uk/

https://github.com/CIRCSE/WFL
https://www.w3.org/community/ontolex/
http://linguistic-lod.org/llod-cloud
http://linguistics.okfn.org
https://data.gov.uk/


74

varying endings and, at times, different stems. Al-
though the task of lemmatization is far from triv-
ial just because of such rich morphology, the most
accurate lemmatizers of Latin achieve an accu-
racy up to 95.30 (Eger et al., 2015). However,
such quite high rate for automatic lemmatization
of Latin must be considered carefully. Indeed, per-
formances of stochastic NLP tools depend heavily
on the training set which their models are built on,
thus decreasing when they are applied to out-of-
domain texts. This problem is particularly hard
when Latin is concerned, because Latin texts show
an enormous diversity resulting from (a) a wide
time span (covering more than two millennia), (b)
a large variety of genres (ranging from literary to
philosophical, historical and documentary texts)
and (c) a diatopic spread all over Europe (and be-
yond).

LiLa is highly lexically-based, grounding on
a simple, but effective assumption that allows a
good balance between feasibility and granular-
ity: textual resources are made of (occurrences
of) words, lexical resources describe properties of
words, and NLP tools process words. Particularly,
the level of lemma is considered the ideal inter-
face between the lexical resources (dictionaries,
thesauri and lexica), annotated corpora and NLP
tools that lemmatize their input text. For this rea-
son, we have identified the collection of canonical
forms of Latin as the core of LiLa. Interoperabil-
ity can be achieved by linking all entries in lexical
resources and corpus tokens that refer to the same
lemma.

The task of building and organizing a reposi-
tory of canonical forms that may serve as a hub in
this architecture is, however, complicated by the
fact that different corpora, lexica or tools for Latin
may adopt different strategies to solve conceptual
and linguistic challenges posed by lemmatization.
These include:

• different citation forms for the same word, re-
sulting from alternation in (a) the graphical
representation (voluptas vs. uoluptas, “satis-
faction”), (b) the spelling (sulphur vs. sulfur,
“brimstone”), (c) the ending (diameter vs. di-
ametros vs. diametrus, “diameter”) or (d) the
paradigmatic slot representing the lemma (se-
quor, “to follow”, first person singular of the
passive/deponent present indicative vs. se-
quo, first person singular of the active present
indicative);

• the existence of homographic lemmas, like
occido (occı̄do < ob + caedo, “to strike
down”) vs. occido (occı̆do < ob + cado, “to
fall down”);

• ambiguity in choosing the lemma: certain
forms, such as participles or deadjectival ad-
verbs, can be considered either part of the
inflectional paradigm of verbs or adjectives,
or independent lemmas provided with an au-
tonomous entry in lexical resources;

• polythematic words, for which missing forms
are taken from other stems, like melior used
as comparative of bonus (see En. “good” and
“better”).

When dealing with homographs, corpora may
choose to index the different entries, but most of
the times the string of the lemma is not disam-
biguated. Participles can either be lemmatized al-
ways under the main verb, or have a dedicated
participial lemma, which in turn may be used sys-
tematically or only when the participle has grown
into an autonomous lexical item (e.g. doctus,
“learned”, morphologically the past participle of
doceo, “to teach”). Deadjectival adverbs (e.g. ae-
qualiter, “evenly” from aequalis, “equal”) or pe-
culiar forms such as comparatives (both regular
and irregular) are sometimes subsumed under the
(positive degree of the) adjective, or given a self-
standing lemma.

3.2 Lemmas and Forms. Towards an
Ontology of Latin Canonical Forms

Given the challenges and the degree of variation
raised by different lemmatization strategies for
Latin, our approach in LiLa is to be as descrip-
tive and inclusive as possible: our aim is rather
to collect as many word forms as may be used
for lemmatization and attempt to model their re-
lations. In order to do that, LiLa builds upon a
series of ontologies for lexical resources to de-
scribe the word forms used in lemmatization, and
use the Web Ontology Language (OWL) (McGuin-
ness et al., 2004) in order to model the relations
between them.

Building upon the Ontolex ontology, we define
a Lemma as a Form of a word. In this way, lexical
resources compiled using the Ontolex or Lemon
formalism can already be connected to our collec-
tion. Forms have one or more written representa-
tions and are linked to one or more PoS. PoS are



75

linked to the appropriate OLiA concepts, and we
plan to represent the most widespread tagsets used
in Latin PoS-tagging via dedicated OLiA ontolo-
gies.

Relations between the lemma and the other
forms of the same word are defined horizontally,
i.e. via direct relations between forms. Although
the architecture is ready to accommodate all the
inflected forms of a lexical item that are either at-
tested in a text or morphologically possible, we are
currently populating it only with those forms that
are potentially used as lemmas, to create the col-
lection of canonical forms representing the core of
LiLa. The fundamental list of Latin lemmas used
in the Knowledge Base is taken from the one pro-
vided by the Latin morphological analyzer Lem-
lat (Passarotti et al., 2017).18 In particular, fol-
lowing the practice of Lemlat, we define a spe-
cial subclass of lemmas, called “hypolemmas”, to
harmonize different strategies for the lemmatiza-
tion of participles. Hypolemmas are defined as
forms of the inflectional paradigm of a word that
may be used in annotated corpora or by NLP tools
to lemmatize certain forms instead of the main
lemma. Namely, these are the nominal inflected
forms of verbal paradigms (participles, gerunds,
gerundives, supines). Currently, we generated hy-
polemmas for all the canonical forms of present,
future and perfect participles of all verbs in Lem-
lat, and connected them with their main (verbal)
lemma via a subclass of the property “Form vari-
ant” defined by the Lemon ontology.19 Thus, for
instance, the present participle subsistens, “taking
a stand” is hypolemma of the main lemma sub-
sisto, “to take a stand”. The same subclass is used
also for alternative paradigmatic slots representing
the lemma.

Alternations in spelling and ending are man-
aged as different written representations of the
same lemma, while systematic graphical varia-
tions (e.g. u/v) are preprocessed automatically.

4 Populating the LiLa Knowledge Base

In this section we present the current status of the
LiLa Knowledge Base obtained by (a) including
the lemma collection taken from Lemlat and (b)
linking one lexical resource and one treebank, us-
ing the principles discussed in the previous Sec-

18https://github.com/CIRCSE/LEMLAT3
19https://www.lemon-model.net/

lemon-cookbook/node17.html

tion.
The data and resources currently linked in LiLa

are stored in a triple store using the Jena frame-
work;20 the Fuseki component exposes the data as
SPARQL end-point accessible over HTTP.21

4.1 The Lemma Collection
As mentioned, our database of canonical forms
is built on top on the lemma collection used by
Lemlat. Lemlat relies on a lexical basis result-
ing from the collation of three Latin dictionaries
(Georges and Georges, 1913–1918; Glare, 1982;
Gradenwitz, 1904) for a total of 40,014 lexical en-
tries and 43,432 lemmas, as more than one lemma
can be included in one lexical entry. This lexi-
cal basis was recently enlarged by adding most of
the Onomasticon (26,415 lemmas out of 28,178)
provided by the 5th edition of the Forcellini dic-
tionary (Budassi and Passarotti, 2016) and the en-
tries from a large reference glossary for Medieval
Latin, namely the Glossarium Mediae et Infimae
Latinitatis (du Cange et al., 1883–1887; Cecchini
et al., 2018).

In Lemlat, lemmas are annotated with up to two
PoS tags expressed using the Universal PoS tagset
adopted in UD (Petrov et al., 2011), as well as with
other information such as the grammatical gender
for nouns and the inflectional class for verbs, ad-
jectives and nouns. While the linking between the
Universal PoS tags and OLiA is already in place,
the process of aligning the other morphological
features is in progress.

4.2 Lexical Resources. The Word Formation
Latin Lexicon

The WFL lexicon is strictly bound to Lemlat, as
it enhances its lexical basis with information on
derivational morphology.

The information provided by WFL can be read-
ily linked to the lemma collection of LiLa. In the
Knowledge Base, each Lemma is connected to a
series of Morphemes, including at least a Lexi-
cal Base, and possibly Prefixes and Suffixes. This
conceptualization yields a network representation
of the morphological derivation of Latin words,
where lemmas belonging to the same word forma-
tion family are linked to the same Lexical Base,
which in LiLa is not assigned any written repre-
sentation and functions just as a connector of the

20A prototype of the LiLa triple store is available at
https://lila-erc.eu/data/.

21https://jena.apache.org/

https://github.com/CIRCSE/LEMLAT3
https://www.lemon-model.net/lemon-cookbook/node17.html
https://www.lemon-model.net/lemon-cookbook/node17.html
https://lila-erc.eu/data/
https://jena.apache.org/


76

olia:CommonNoun

olia:Adjectiv

Suffix

olia:Noun

olia:Adjective

base:2798

suffix:40

a

-e

rdfs:label

suffix:13

a

-ari

rdfs:label

lemma:7483

a

hasBase

hasSuffix

classiarius

writtenRep

lemma:7482

a

hasBase

hasSuffix

classiarii

writtenRep

lemma:7486

a

hasBase

suffix:97
hasSuffix

classicus

writtenRep

lemma:7481
ahasBase

hasSuffix

classeus
writtenRep

a

-ic

rdfs:label

suffix:69

a

-(i)cul

rdfs:label

lemma:7484

a

hasBase

hasSuffix

classicula

writtenRep

lemma:7487

ahasBase

hasSuffix

classicus

writtenRep
lemma:7485

a

hasBase

hasSuffix

classicum

writtenRep

lemma:7488

a

hasBase

classis writtenRep

Figure 1: The word formation family including classis
and classicus, with lemmas and suffixes.

lemmas of the same family; words derived with
the same affixe(s) can also be readily retrieved.

Figure 1 shows a word formation family, i.e.
a set of lemmas connected to a common lexical
base. The family includes, among others, lemmas
like noun classis, “class/division”, and adjective
classicus, “of the fleet/classic”, the latter being de-
rived with suffix -ic. By following the links to suf-
fix 97, labelled “-ic”, it would be possible to re-
trieve all the other lemmas that are formed with
that morpheme, like for instance ethicus, “ethic”.

4.3 Textual Resources. The PROIEL
Treebank

Lemmatized Latin corpora, regardless of genre,
date or provenance, are already fit to be linked
to LiLa. As a preliminary experiment, we inte-
grated one of the largest and most diverse anno-
tated corpora of Latin, the PROIEL treebank, fo-
cusing on the version distributed in UD release
2.3. With the help of the CoNLL-RDF applica-
tion, we generated an RDF graph out of the tree-
bank, where the main nodes are the corpus tokens
and sentences, as defined in NIF. Most annotations
recorded in the corpus file are expressed as data
attributes (strings) of the nodes, while some infor-
mation (PoS, syntactic annotation) is recorded as
edges between nodes.

Figure 2 gives a (simplified) representation of
the nodes and relations attached to a single token
in our architecture. The word inferni (“hell”, gen-
itive singular) from Jerome’s Vulgate (Revelation

1.18) is part of sentence proiel:s17835 022

and is governed in the UD tree by the word
proiel:s17835 4 (see the attribute HEAD)
via the UD relation “conj” (“conjunct”; EDGE).23

Although LiLa is a lexically-based resource, it
integrates information about sentences if they are
available in the original corpus, i.e. if the corpus,
as treebanks are, is split into sentences. In this
way, users have the opportunity to use also the sen-
tence boundaries as context information for their
research.

The word shares the same string in the LEMMA
attribute with the written representation of one
Lemma object in LiLa (lemma:20369; written
representation: infernus); the two nodes point also
to the same PoS concept from the OLiA ontol-
ogy (CommonNoun). In this case, the token can
be straightforwardly and unambiguously matched
to the lemma, so that all the lexical information
(currently, the links to derivational morphemes) at-
tached to it becomes retrievable.

The figure reproduces three other lemmas that
are attached to the same lexical base with id 639
(infernalis, “nether” and inferiae, “sacrifices to the
dead”) and the same suffix (arcanus, “hidden, se-
cret”) of our target word infernus. Arcanus is in
fact built from the stem of arca (“coffin”, not re-
ported in the Figure, but retrievable following the
edges) via the same suffix -n that produces infer-
nus from inferus (“lower”). All this information is
taken from the WFL lexicon; the image illustrates
how the network of connections in LiLa can be
leveraged to move from the level of lexicon to cor-
pora and vice versa, in order to extract complex
linguistic information from distributed resources.
Note, therefore, that Figure 2 incorporates the type
of information represented in Figure 1, although
only a part of the dense network of connections
can be displayed here.

4.4 Evaluation of Lemma Matching

Table 1 reports the results of our matching be-
tween the strings used in PROIEL to lemmatize
the tokens and the Lemma objects in LiLa.

The PROIEL UD 2.3 corpus includes 18,400
sentences and 199,958 tokens; in total, the corpus
uses 8,536 different strings (i.e. lemmas) to lem-
matize them. 5,806 out of these, corresponding

22Full sentence: “et habeo claves mortis et inferni.”. Trans-
lation: “And I hold the keys of death and of Hell.”.

23https://universaldependencies.org/u/
dep/conj.html

https://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/conj.html
https://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/conj.html


77

nif:Sentence

Lemma

nif:Word

Suffix

olia:CommonNoun

lemma:arcanus

a

suffix:7

hasSuffix

base:639

lemma:inferiae
a

hasBaseproiel:s17835_6

a

a

proiel:17835_4conll:HEAD

lemma:20369

hasLemma

proiel:s17835_0
isPartOfSent

NOUN

conll:UPOS

inferni

conll:WORD

ref=REV_1.18

conll:MISC

infernus

conll:LEMMA

conj

conll:EDGE

a

a

hasBase

hasSuffix

infernusontolex:writtenRep

a

-n

rdfs:label

a

proiel:s17836_0

nif:nextSentence

lemma:infernalis
a

hasBase

Figure 2: A token from the PROIEL UD 2.3 treebank linked to the LiLa Knowledge Base.

Type of Match Nr. Tokens Nr. Lemmas
String match 162,998 5,806
PoS disambig. 6,262 209
Hypolemmas 1,026 152
Onomasticon 7,252 974
Multiple matches 11,865 242
No match 10,555 1,164

Table 1: Matching scores between corpus tokens and
Lemmas in the LiLa Knowledge Base.

to 162,998 tokens (81.52%), were matched unam-
biguously to a lemma in LiLa through a simple
string comparison between the written representa-
tion of the lemma in the Knowledge Base and the
PROIEL string.24

For 6,262 additional tokens, a single match was
obtained by using the PoS tag to disambiguate be-
tween possible candidates. This is the case of the
match illustrated in Figure 2, as the string infernus

24It might be the case that simple string comparison leads
to wrong connections. This can happen when a lemma pro-
vided by a corpus is not present in the lexical basis of LiLa
and it is homographic to one of the lemmas there included.
However, we have not found such a case so far in our data.

can point either to an adjective (“lower”) or, as it is
for the token in the Figure, to a noun (“hell”). Sim-
ple match and PoS-driven disambiguation cover
together 84.64% of the PROIEL tokens.

This workflow of using PoS tags to disam-
biguate the greedy match of simple-string compar-
ison is more productive than comparing tuples of
string and PoS tag from the onset. For the use of
tagsets of different granularity or strategy might
result in loss of connection even for tokens that
could be unambiguously matched. For instance,
the lemma ille (demonstrative “that”), which oc-
curs with a frequency of 109.62 per 10k words in
PROIEL, can be matched to a single Lemma using
string comparison. However, while the Lemma is
tagged only as an Adjective in our collection, it is
annotated as Determiner in 445 cases (vs. Adjec-
tive 1,747) in PROIEL. Those 445 tokens would
not be matched if we used the tuple comparison.

After PoS-driven disambiguation, 11,865 to-
kens (about 6% of the total) remain associated
with more than one Lemma in LiLa (with a maxi-
mum of 4 links for 5 tokens). In several cases, this
is due to actual ambiguity: some high-frequency



78

lemmas admit multiple interpretations, even af-
ter PoS-driven disambiguation. For instance, the
string dico (120.86 per 10k tokens in PROIEL) can
be matched to two different entries with PoS Verb
(one corresponding to a verb with infinitive dicere,
“to say”, the other with infinitive dicare, “to dedi-
cate”), as does tempus (14.60 per 10k), which can
be reduced to two different nouns with the same
inflection (one meaning “time”, the other “tem-
ple”).

In the case of omnis, “all/every” (87.42 per 10k
tokens), the multiple links point to an error in
the Knowledge Base inherited from the Lemlat
database: the lemma was wrongly duplicated and
one of the entries must be deleted. Mismatches or
multiple matches can thus provide a useful testbed
to diagnose problems in the architecture.

Although the lemma collection of LiLa does
not currently include the named entites of the For-
cellini’s Onomasticon provided by Lemlat, 7,252
proper names in PROIEL can be matched unam-
biguously to one entry in the Forcellini dictionary
(see Section 5).

Unresolved mismatches (10,555 tokens) are due
to different factors. Tokenization of the enclitic -
que, “and” in PROIEL produces a lemma which is
very frequent (86.97 per 10k words), but not yet
present in LiLa (as Lemlat presupposes a differ-
ent tokenization). Deadjectival adverbs (e.g. ve-
hementer, “violently”) are treated as lemmas in
PROIEL, but reduced to their base adjective by
Lemlat (e.g. vehemens, “violent”), so that no
lemma like vehementer exists yet in LiLa. Dead-
jectival adverbs used as lemmas cover about 1,300
tokens in PROIEL. Named entities missing in
the Onomasticon (e.g. Iudaei, “the Jewish peo-
ple”), strings written with diacritics in PROIEL
(e.g. appr(eh)endo, “to seize”, corresponding to
two written representations: apprehendo and ap-
prendo), numerals and non-Latin expressions (e.g.
the string: “Greek expression”, used to lemmatize
Greek words) also affect the matching.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we have introduced the fundamen-
tal components (and their relations) of a Knowl-
edge Base, called LiLa, built to make linguistic
resources for Latin interoperable according to the
Linked Data paradigm.

As LiLa is highly lexically-based, we have dis-
cussed some issues concerning the repository of

Latin lemmas that we have included so far therin,
particularly focusing on some challenges raised
by lemmatization. Indeed, one of the main tasks
of LiLa is harmonizing between different strate-
gies of linguistic annotation, namely lemmatiza-
tion and PoS tagging, which currently still af-
fects the interoperability between different anno-
tated corpora (not only for Latin). Furthermore,
we have described the inclusion in the Knowledge
Base of a lexical resource (WFL) and of a treebank
(PROIEL).

The LiLa project started in June 2018 and has a
duration of five years. Thus, there are several open
issues to address. Some of the most urgent and re-
lated to this paper are mentioned in what follows.

Given the central role played by the object
Lemma in the Knowledge Base, one challenge
of the project is building an efficient strategy for
automatic PoS tagging and lemmatization of the
(many) corpora of Latin texts still missing this
level of linguistic annotation. Indeed, if connect-
ing raw textual data to LiLa still remains pos-
sible (limiting interoperability at the level of to-
kens), the real added value results from exploiting
the connecting power of the Lemma object in the
Knowledge Base. We are now testing the already
available tools and trained models on Latin texts
of different eras and genres, to evaluate how much
the application of these tools and models to out-
of-domain texts affects their accuracy.

As mentioned, since Lemlat lemmatizes dead-
jectival adverbs under the adjective they are de-
rived from, these are missing from the list of lem-
mas we populated LiLa with so far. However,
generating all morphologically possible deadjecti-
val adverbs from Lemlat is straightforward. Once
generated, these will be included in the Knowl-
edge Base as lemmas.

In the near future, we also plan to extend the
lemma collection of LiLa with the lemmas pro-
vided by the Onomasticon of the Forcellini dictio-
nary, as well with those by the du Cange glossary.
Another short time goal is including the LWN as a
key resource to support semantic-based search.

Our hope is that LiLa will help to foster the ex-
ploitation and accessibility of linguistic resources
for Latin, enlarging the number of their users and
impacting the diverse scholarly community con-
cerned. Thanks to its open-ended nature, LiLa
aims to become the main venue where publish-
ing linguistic resources and, more generally, digi-



79

tal objects concerning the Latin cultural heritage.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
project LiLa (Linking Latin. Building a Knowl-
edge Base of Linguistic Resources for Latin).
This project has received funding from the Eu-
ropean Research Council (ERC) under the Euro-
pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innova-
tion programme - Grant Agreement No 769994.

References

Michael Ashburner, Catherine A Ball, Judith A Blake,
David Botstein, Heather Butler, J Michael Cherry,
Allan P Davis, Kara Dolinski, Selina S Dwight,
Janan T Eppig, et al. 2000. Gene ontology: tool
for the unification of biology. Nature genetics,
25(1):25.

David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2011. The an-
cient greek and latin dependency treebanks. In Lan-
guage technology for cultural heritage, pages 79–
98. Springer.

Steven Bird and Mark Liberman. 2001. A formal
framework for linguistic annotation. Speech com-
munication, 33(1-2):23–60.

Marco Budassi and Marco Passarotti. 2016. Nomen
omen. Enhancing the Latin morphological analyser
Lemlat with an onomasticon. In Proceedings of the
10th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology
for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Human-
ities (LaTeCH), pages 90–94, Berlin, Germany. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Paul Buitelaar, Philipp Cimiano, John McCrae, Elena
Montiel-Ponsoda, and Thierry Declerck. 2011. On-
tology lexicalisation: The lemon perspective. In
Proceedings of the Workshops. 9th International
Conference on Terminology and Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 33–36.

Flavio Cecchini, Marco Passarotti, Paolo Ruffolo,
Marinella Testori, Lia Draetta, Martina Fieromonte,
Annarita Liano, Costanza Marini, and Giovanni Pi-
antanida. 2018. Enhancing the latin morphological
analyser lemlat with a medieval latin glossary. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Italian Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (CLiC-it 2018). 10-12 De-
cember 2018, Torino, pages 87–92.

Christian Chiarcos, Philipp Cimiano, Thierry Declerck,
and John P McCrae. 2013. Linguistic linked open
data (llod). introduction and overview. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Workshop on Linked Data in Linguis-
tics (LDL-2013): Representing and linking lexicons,
terminologies and other language data, pages i–xi.

Christian Chiarcos and Christian Fäth. 2017. CoNLL-
RDF: Linked Corpora Done in an NLP-Friendly
Way. In Language, Data, and Knowledge, pages
74–88, Cham. Springer International Publishing.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Hellmann, and Sebas-
tian Nordhoff. 2012. Introduction and overview. In
Linked Data in Linguistics, pages 1–12. Springer.

Christian Chiarcos and Maria Sukhareva. 2015. OLiA -
Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation. Semantic Web
Journal, 6(4):379–386.

Charles du Fresne du Cange, Bénédictins de Saint-
Maur, Pierre Carpentier, Louis Henschel, and
Léopold Favre. 1883–1887. Glossarium mediae et
infimae latinitatis. Niort, France.

Steffen Eger, Tim vor der Brück, and Alexander
Mehler. 2015. Lexicon-assisted tagging and lemma-
tization in latin: A comparison of six taggers and
two lemmatization methods. In Proceedings of the
9th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology
for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Human-
ities (LaTeCH), pages 105–113.

Marieke van Erp. 2012. Reusing linguistic resources:
Tasks and goals for a linked data approach. In
Linked Data in Linguistics, pages 57–64. Springer.

Christiane Fellbaum. 2012. Wordnet. The Encyclope-
dia of Applied Linguistics.

Karl Ernst Georges and Heinrich Georges. 1913–
1918. Ausführliches lateinisch-deutsches
Handwörterbuch. Hahn, Hannover, Germany.

Peter GW Glare. 1982. Oxford Latin dictionary.
Clarendon Press. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK.

John Goodwin, Catherine Dolbear, and Glen Hart.
2008. Geographical linked data: The administra-
tive geography of great britain on the semantic web.
Transactions in GIS, 12:19–30.

Otto Gradenwitz. 1904. Laterculi Vocum Latinarum:
voces Latinas et a fronte et a tergo ordinandas.
Hirzel, Leipzig, Germany.

Dag TT Haug and Marius Jøhndal. 2008. Creating
a parallel treebank of the old indo-european bible
translations. In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage
Data (LaTeCH 2008), pages 27–34.

Sebastian Hellmann, Jens Lehmann, Sören Auer, and
Martin Brümmer. 2013. Integrating NLP us-
ing Linked Data. In 12th International Semantic
Web Conference, Sydney, Australia, October 21-25,
2013.

Ora Lassila, Ralph R. Swick, World Wide, and Web
Consortium. 1998. Resource description framework
(rdf) model and syntax specification.

https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-59888-8_6.pdf
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-59888-8_6.pdf
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-59888-8_6.pdf
http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/olia-%E2%80%93-ontologies-linguistic-annotation
http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/olia-%E2%80%93-ontologies-linguistic-annotation
https://svn.aksw.org/papers/2013/ISWC_NIF/public.pdf
https://svn.aksw.org/papers/2013/ISWC_NIF/public.pdf


80

Eleonora Litta, Marco Passarotti, and Chris Culy. 2016.
Formatio formosa est. building a word formation
lexicon for latin. In Proceedings of the third ital-
ian conference on computational linguistics (clic–it
2016), pages 185–189.

Barbara McGillivray. 2013. Methods in Latin compu-
tational linguistics. Brill.

Barbara McGillivray and Marco Passarotti. 2009. The
development of the “index thomisticus” treebank va-
lency lexicon. In Proceedings of the EACL 2009
Workshop on Language Technology and Resources
for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities,
and Education (LaTeCH–SHELT&R 2009), pages
43–50.

Deborah L McGuinness, Frank Van Harmelen, et al.
2004. Owl web ontology language overview. W3C
recommendation, 10(10):2004.

Stefano Minozzi. 2010. The latin wordnet project.
In Latin Linguistics Today. Latin Linguistics To-
day. Akten des 15. Internationalen Kolloquiums zur
Lateinischen Linguistik, pages 707–716.

Marco Passarotti. 2009. Theory and practice of corpus
annotation in the index thomisticus treebank. Lexis,
27(A):5–23.

Marco Passarotti, Marco Budassi, Eleonora Litta, and
Paolo Ruffolo. 2017. The lemlat 3.0 package for
morphological analysis of latin. In Proceedings
of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing
Historical Language, 133, pages 24–31. Linköping
University Electronic Press.

Marco Passarotti, Berta González Saavedra, and
Christophe Onambele. 2016. Latin vallex. a
treebank-based semantic valency lexicon for latin.
In LREC.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2011.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1104.2086.

Emanuele Pianta, Luisa Bentivogli, and Christian Gi-
rardi. 2002. Multiwordnet: developing an aligned
multilingual database. In First international confer-
ence on global WordNet, pages 293–302.

Eric Prud’Hommeaux, Andy Seaborne, et al. 2008.
Sparql query language for rdf. w3c. Internet:
https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/[Accessed
on February 27th, 2019].


