



















































Towards Automatic Variant Analysis of Ancient Devotional Texts


Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Computational Approaches to Historical Language Change, pages 240–249
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

240

Towards Automatic Variant Analysis of Ancient Devotional Texts

Amir Hazem1 Béatrice Daille1 Dominique Stutzmann2 Jacob Currie2 Christine Jacquin1
(1) Université de Nantes, LS2N, France

(2) IRHT-CNRS, France
{amir.hazem, beatrice.daille, christine.jacquin}@ls2n.fr

{dominique.stutzmann, jacob.currie}@irht.cnrs.fr

Abstract

We address in this paper the issue of text reuse
in liturgical manuscripts of the middle ages.
More specifically, we study variant readings
of the Obsecro Te prayer, part of the devo-
tional Books of Hours often used by Chris-
tians as guidance for their daily prayers. We
aim at automatically extracting and categoris-
ing pairs of words and expressions that exhibit
variant relations. For this purpose, we intro-
duce a linguistic classification that allows to
better characterize the variants than edit oper-
ations. Then, we study the evolution of Ob-
secro Te texts from a temporal and geographi-
cal axis. Finally, we contrast several unsuper-
vised state-of-the-art approaches for the auto-
matic extraction of Obsecro Te variants. Based
on the manual observation of 772 Obsecro Te
copies which show more than 21,000 variants,
we show that the proposed methodology is
helpful for an automatic study of variants and
may serve as basis to analyse and to depict use-
ful information from devotional texts.

1 Introduction

Among the most popular texts of the late mid-
dle ages were Books of Hours, used by Christians
as a guidance book for their daily prayers. Ap-
pearing in the thirteenth century, in France, the
Netherlands, and England and, later on, in Italy,
Spain, and many other European countries, Books
of Hours constitute one of the bestsellers of the
late medieval period. Books of Hours evolved
over the years and additional texts were included.
Mostly written in Latin, they often include parts in
Vernacular languages (esp. French). The whole
was arranged in a particular repetitive structure
that varied in its details depending on times of
the day, seasons, liturgical use, patrons, origin
(Wieck, 1988; Hindman and Marrow, 2013), etc.

Despite their success, the content of Books of
Hours has been rarely studied on a large-scale in

NLP, mainly due to the lack of available tran-
scriptions. few of them are available. One tex-
tual element of Books of Hours which offers an
opportunity for study is Obsecro Te. This devo-
tional prayer to the Virgin Mary was manually
transcribed and annotated based on 772 Books of
Hours (Plummer and Clark, 2015). More than
21,000 textual variants were recorded. Plum-
mer and Clark (2015) observed and reported three
types of variants present in the Obsecro Te dataset,
that is: (i) addition (marked ”+”, e.g. ”pecca-
tis + vel mortalibus” for criminalibus peccatis /
criminalibus peccatis vel mortalibus), (ii) substi-
tution (marked ”:”, e.g. ”opera misericordia: mis-
ericordia opera” for opera misericordia / miseri-
cordia opera), and (iii) omission (marked ”-”, e.g.
”-gloriosam” for ostendem michi gloriosam / os-
tende michi). This classification is roughly based
on a surface assessment and does not allow a
more fine-grained analysis of variants character-
istic while no linguistic information is included.
In order to study in a more precise way Obse-
cro Te variant readings, we adopt a linguistic clas-
sification based on both synformic and concep-
tual (similar words form) concepts (Laufer, 1988;
Daille, 2017). Clark’s variants consist in addition,
suppression or omission operations at the word
level. The same operation groups diverse linguis-
tic operations. Substitution operation for instance,
may refer to flexional variants (crucem / cruce),
paradigmatic variants obtained by synonymic sub-
stitution (gratie / indulgencie), etc. Also, two
consecutive substitution operations may charac-
terise variant permutation (opera misericordia /
misericordia opera). We conduct an automatic
empirical study of the main unsupervised state-
of-the-art approaches dealing with variant extrac-
tion and discuss our findings according to the pro-
posed linguistic variant classification. Finally, we
study variant-relation phenomena and the evolu-



241

Num Obsecro Te 1 Obsecro Te 2

1 Obsecro Te domina sancta maria mater dei pietate plenissima summi Obsecro Te domina sancta maria mater dei pietate plenissima summi

2 regis filia mater gloriosissima mater orphanorum consolatio regis filia mater gloriosissima mater orphanorum consolatio

3 desolatorum via errantium salus in te sperantium virgo ante desolatorum via errantium salus et spes in te sperantium virgo ante

4 partum virgo in partu et virgo post partum Fons misericordie partum virgo in partu virgo post partum

5 fons salutis et gratie fons pietatis et leticie fons consolationis fons salutis et gratie fons pietatis et leticie fons consolationis

6 et indulgencie Per illam sanctam ineffabilem leticiam et indulgencie Et per illam sanctam inestimabilem leticiam

7 qua exultavit spiritus tuus in illa hora quando tibi per gabrielem qua exultavit spiritus tuus in illa hora quando tibi per gabrielem

8 annunciatus filius dei fuit archangelum annunciatus et conceptus filius dei fuit

9 Et per illud divinum mysterium quod tunc operatus est spiritus sanctus Et per illud divinum mysterium quod tunc operatus est spiritus sanctus in te

Table 1: Comparison of the first lines of two Obsecro Te variants. Text in red indicates Obsecro Te variants.

tion of Obsecro Te readings from a temporal and
geographical axis and discuss several aspects of
Books of Hours.

This work constitutes a first step in the auto-
matic study of Book of Hours content in order to
discover the similarities and differences in prac-
tices of the middle age. The similarities can for
instance serve to detect structural, geographical
or terminological correlations between Books of
Hours. Whether issued from different regions of
the same country or from different countries of
medieval Europe.

2 Books of Hours and Obsecro Te

Books of Hours contain a set of prayers to be used
at eight hours of the day. The structure and content
of Books of Hours vary from one book to another
and this particularity is certainly due to the nature
of textual transmission in a world before the print-
ing press. Books of Hours did not appear as such
until the thirteenth century. Before, other types of
books were used. For their daily prayers, Chris-
tians adopted the Psalter previously used by the
Jews for their devotions. Over the years, a number
of additional texts came to enrich the Psalter, such
as, antiphons, canticles, hymns, readings from the
Bible, etc. The whole was arranged in a repeti-
tive structure that varied in its details depending
on times of the day and seasons. Also, a calendar
was used to record local saints, days and feast’s
seasons. Finally, rubrics were employed as guid-
ance on what to say and when to say it. This re-
sulted in a complex book known as breviary. The
breviary was used by clerks and was not intended
to be used by lay people for whom it was too com-
plex. However, the desire of lay people to imi-
tate monastic practices resulted in the creation of
a simpler book, that was easier to use: the Book of
Hours. Amongst the prayers in Books of Hours is

the Obsecro Te, a supplication to the Virgin Mary.
As the content of a Book of Hours may vary due to
writing choice, local liturgical practices, etc., we
aim in this paper to study the amount and nature
of variants of Obsecro Te.

Table 1 shows an example of the first lines of
two copies of Obsecro Te. Red are the variants
according to an arbitrary lines alignment of the
two texts (Plummer and Clark, 2015). As high-
lighted by the passages in red, several variants can
be observed. In line 3, for instance, the words ”et
spes” in Obsecro Te 1 are added between the words
”salus” et ”in” ((Plummer and Clark, 2015) notes
that ”salus + et spes”, while in line 4, the words
”et” and ”Fons misericordie” are omitted in Ob-
secro Te 2. Also, at lines 7-8, the Annunciation
is addressed with the expression per Gabrielem
annunciatus ( Obsecro Te 1), while Obsecro Te 2
expands upon the passage by specifying the an-
nouncer, the archangelum, and the effect et con-
ceptus. If the reasons of such variants are a mat-
ter of interpretation, we aim at depicting the most
common ones. For that purpose, we define in
the next section our proposed classification of the
observed variants before presenting an empirical
study for variant extraction and categorisation.

3 Obsecro Te Variant Categorization

We introduce in this section a new variant clas-
sification inspired by similar lexical forms (Syn-
forms) introduced in (Laufer, 1988) and the ter-
minological variant typology proposed in (Daille,
2017) applying to nominals.

3.1 Similar Lexical Forms (Synforms)

The concept of synforms was first introduced to
deal with lexical confusions of English learners
(Laufer, 1988). Synforms are defined at the word
level and can be classified on the basis of their



242

N-Synforms

PermutationReductionExpansionLexical SubstitutionDerivationInflexionOrthography

Figure 1: N-Synforms variant representation

similarity features. Words can be different in
their affix and similar in their root, different in
one phoneme, consonant or vowel. Usually, ten
categories including letter addition, substitution
and omission, are reported (Laufer, 1988; Kocic,
2008). These categories include: productive syn-
forms with the same root and different suffixes
(considerable / considerate, successful / succes-
sive); non-productive synforms with the same root
and different suffixes (credible / credulous, capa-
ble / capacious); synforms which, although iden-
tical in consonants, have different vowels (base /
bias, manual / menial); synforms with identical
phonemes except for one consonant (price / prize,
extend / extent), etc.

3.2 Lexical Similarity at the Word Ngram
Level (N-Synforms)

We extend the similar lexical forms concept
(Laufer, 1988; Kocic, 2008) to the word ngram
level. Nonetheless, we do not exploit the ten cat-
egories presented in (Laufer, 1988), as it deals
with confusions of English learners. Therefore,
we keep the word level categorization of unigrams
as defined in Daille (2017) and extend it using lin-
guistic operations often applied to complex terms
and to ngrams. Base on the copies of the Obsecro
Te prayer and the variant annotations in (Plummer
and Clark, 2015), we propose a linguistic repre-
sentation of variant’s typology that can be applied
to word ngrams of any length. Our typology in-
cludes basic linguistic variants at the word level
(orthography, inflexion, derivation), lexical substi-
tution, as well as operations specific to sequence
of words (reduction, expansion and permutation).
Figure 1 illustrates our typology. We describe the
proposed categorization as follows:

Orthography letter substitution (consonant or
vowel) like dilecto / delecto;

Inflexion latin inflexions like crucem / cruce;

Derivation is defined as an operation which cre-
ates a new lexical unit from one existing word

through modification processes such as affix-
ation or convertion dilecto (Adj)/ dilectissimo
(Adj superlative);

Lexical substitution refers to any operation of
substitution of a lexical unit by another. Lex-
ical substitution allows variants in semantic
relation, such as synonymy (tribuas / con-
cedas), near-synonymy (gratie / indulgencie)
and other variants with no clear semantic re-
lation such as (tribuas / obtineas);

Expansion refers to several linguistic operations
such as modification which specifies the
nominal phrase, predication which inserts
the nominal phrase into a nominal argu-
ment structure, coordination that emphasize
an aspect (criminalibus peccatis / criminal-
ibus peccatis vel mortalibus);

Reduction removes one of the lexical con-
stituents of ngrams such as ostendem michi
gloriosam / ostendem michi;

Permutation of the n-gram elements such as
criminalibus peccatis / peccatis criminalibus.

Of course, like any typology, ours does not claim
to be exhaustive. Nonetheless, it can be extended,
if necessary, to other linguistic operations like
composition. Also, variants that combine multiple
operations like lexical substitution and expansion
or substitution exist but they are marginal.

4 Variant Extraction Approaches

We introduce in this section four unsupervised
state-of-the-art approaches to the task of variant
extraction: Edit distance (Levenshtein, 1966), Jac-
card Index (Jaccard, 1901), distributional bag of
words (Harris, 1971) and its adaptation to variable
length variants extraction and finally, distributed
word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013; Arora
et al., 2017).

4.1 Edit Distance (Levenshtein)
Edit distance, also known as the distance of Leven-
shtein (Levenshtein, 1966), aligns local similari-



243

ties and differences between strings and calculates
string-alignment. Distance is calculated from the
number of necessary operations (insertions, dele-
tions and substitutions) for transforming the string
x into the string y. Among the edit distance ap-
plications, we find plagiarism detection and ortho-
graphic corrections. Edit distance formula is rep-
resented as follows:

D(i, j) = min

D[i− 1, j] + SuppCost(i)D[i, j − 1] + InsCost(i)D[i− 1, j − 1] + SubCost(i, j) (1)
where D(i,j) represents the distance between two

ngrams i et j and Suppcost(i), InsCost(i) rep-
resent respectively the deletion, insertion costs of
i. Finally, SubCost(i, j) represents the substitu-
tion cost of i by j. When the three cost functions
are put to 1, Edit distance is equivalent to Leven-
sthein distance. The use of Edit Distance is based
on the observation that several Obsecro Te vari-
ants may be synformic (graphically similar). For
instance, salvatione is very close to salvationis or
salvationem. In this case, Edit distance score is 2
between salvatione and salvationis (the letter e is
substituted by i and the addition of s) and a score
of 1 between salvatione and salvationem (addition
of the letter m).

4.2 Jaccard Index

Jaccard Index (JI) (Jaccard, 1901) measures the
degree of similarity between two sets. This is rep-
resented by the number of elements in common
normalized by the elements of the two sets. One
advantage of Jaccard Index is that it is insensitive
to element’s position and for this reason is not af-
fected by element’s permutation. This particular-
ity makes the JI well suited to semantic variants of
permutation type, such as crucifixum vulneratum
and vulneratum crucifixum. In this case, JI score
is 0 which means that the pair of variants is simi-
lar according to permutation property. JI formula
is as follows:

Jaccard(A,B) =
A ∩B
A ∪B

(2)

where the two sets A and B correspond to two
word ngrams, with B a variant candidate. The
intersection and union are both considered at the
character level.

4.3 Distributional Bag of Words

In the distributional Bag of Words (BoW) ap-
proach each word w is represented by its context
vector (Harris, 1971). The context vector of w
gathers all the words with which it appears in the
corpus within a size n context window. The con-
text window represents a set of surrounding words
often close to the sentence level size. To measure
the similarity between words, the cosine (Salton
and Lesk, 1968) is applied between the context
vector of w and all the word context vectors of
the corpus. The closest word to w is a potential
variant. We adapt BoW approach and extend it to
the ngram level. The procedure remains the same,
the main change lying in the context representa-
tion of each variant. Let us consider the follow-
ing example: Levitae autem in tribu familiarum
suarum non sunt numerati cum eis. The context
vector of familiarum suarum is represented by
the following ngrams: Unigrams: Levitae, autem,
in, tribu, non, sunt, numerati, cum, eis; Bigrams:
Levitae autem, autem in, in tribu, non sunt, sunt
numerati, numerati cum, cum eis; 3grams: Levi-
tae autem in, autem in tribu, non sunt numerati,
sunt numerati cum, numerati cum eis; 4grams:
Levitae autem in tribu, non sunt numerati cum,
sunt numerati cum eis; and 5grams: non sunt nu-
merati cum eis. Once the context vectors have
been computed, an association measure is used as
a way to better characterize the contextual rela-
tion between the head of the vector (familiarum
suarum) and its constituents. We consider three
different association measures: mutual informa-
tion (Fano, 1961), discounted odds ratio (Evert,
2005) and log-likelihood (Dunning, 1993). Fi-
nally, to extract the candidates, we compute co-
sine similarity (Salton and Lesk, 1968) between
all ngrams of the corpus. Our adaptation takes
into account broken ngrams. Hence, in addition
to the above cited ngrams, based on non sunt nu-
merati cum eis, we add the following bigrams: non
numerati, non cum, non eis, sunt cum, sunt eis,
numerati eis. Therefore, we assume that the uni-
grams sunt, numerati, and cum may not appear or
were omitted.

4.4 Word Embeddings

In the word embedding approach, each variant is
represented by an embedding vector which is a lin-
ear combination of the word embeddings compos-
ing the variant (Arora et al., 2017). For instance,



244

0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76
Obsecro Te Word overlap similarity

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

44

48

52

56

60

64

68

72

76

8

16

24

32

40

48

Figure 2: Word overlap similarity of 80 randomly selected Obsecro Te texts.

the embedding vector of familiarum suarum, is the
sum of the word embedding vector of familiarum
plus the word embedding vector of suarum. Fi-
nally, after computing the embedding vectors of
all the ngrams which compose the corpus, cosine
similarity is used to extract the variant candidates.
The computation of the embedding vector of a
given variant is represented as follows:

Embedding(A) =

n∑
j=1

Embedding(wj) (3)

where A is a variant and n the number of words
composing A. Embedding(wj) corresponds to
the chosen embedding model of wj . We use two
pre-trained models: Word2Vec1 and FastText2.

5 Experimental Data

To evaluate the automatic extraction of Obse-
cro Te variants, we exploit the Beyond Use 3

database which contains variants extracted manu-
ally from 772 manuscripts (Plummer and Clark,
2015). The given prayer contains 49 segments
(passages) defined arbitrarily. This segmentation
allowed Clark to compare each line of the Obse-
cro Te, manuscript by manuscript, and to extract

1www.cs.cmu.edu/˜dbamman/latin.html
2github.com/facebookresearch/fastText/

blob/master/pretrained-vectors.md
3http://www6.sewanee.edu/BeyondUse/

21,329 variants, of which 3,298 distinct variants.
In order to study the impact of variant length, we
build four distinct evaluation lists. Each one cor-
responds to an ngram size. Hence, we obtain a list
of unigrams that contains only unigrams as vari-
ants; a list of bigrams that contains only bigrams
as variants and so on. We do not go beyond four-
grams because very few ngrams are characterized
by a length longer than four in the corpus. We fi-
nally build a fifth list that contains all the ngrams
of the four previous lists as well as ngram variants
of any length (20% of the variants have a variant
of a different size).

6 Results

Our experimental procedure targets three points:
(i) an empirical evaluation of Obsecro Te read-
ing similarity; (ii) an empirical evaluation of auto-
matic variant extraction; (iii) a qualitative variant
analysis with regard to linguistics, geographic and
diachronic changes.

6.1 Similarity of Obsecro Te Texts

There is substantial variation in the text of the
prayer Obsecro Te. As has been shown in (Wieck,
1988; Plummer and Clark, 2015), the manual anal-
ysis of 772 Obsecro Te prayers revealed several
dissimilarities as well as the existence of more
than 21,000 variants. Figure 2 illustrates the simi-



245

Ngram size (size of the evaluation list)

1 (208) 2 (82) 3 (53) 4 (28) ALL (482)

Method P R F MAP P R F MAP P R F MAP P R F MAP P R F MAP

EditDist 14.0 59.1 22.6 48.3 1.82 10.4 3.11 4.65 2.83 8.49 4.24 6.04 2.85 8.06 4.21 5.43 7.01 28.1 11.2 23.1

Jaccard 11.4 50.8 18.7 37.9 7.80 66.0 13.9 48.7 11.3 66.0 19.3 38.2 7.85 43.0 13.2 22.8 7.12 35.7 11.8 25.3

BOW (IM) 10.2 46.2 16.8 17.3 5.24 45.3 9.40 12.5 9.24 51.9 15.6 14.8 3.21 15.6 5.33 10.5 2.54 10.8 4.11 8.36

BOW (OR) 10.1 46.2 16.7 17.1 4.87 41.6 8.73 12.3 9.05 50.1 15.3 14.5 3.21 15.6 5.33 10.5 2.54 10.9 4.12 8.39

BOW (LL) 12.6 52.6 20.3 48.5 8.04 60.9 14.2 28.6 10.7 60.0 18.2 25.7 2.85 17.7 4.78 12.1 9.70 41.7 15.7 31.9

W2V 7.74 33.7 12.5 23.3 6.95 63.3 12.4 62.3 9.43 65.0 16.4 49.1 12.5 64.0 20.9 40.9 3.89 21.6 6.60 17.2

FastText 6.39 30.2 10.5 28.7 6.95 60.9 12.4 59.7 9.43 63.9 16.4 41.1 12.1 57.3 20.0 29.0 3.25 19.5 5.57 11.6

Table 2: Evaluation of EditDist, Jaccard, BoW and Embedding approaches (W2V and FastText). The results are
presented in terms of precision (P), Recall (R) and Fmeasure (F) at top 10 as well as the mean average precision
(MAP). Between parentheses we display, for each ngram size, the size of the evaluation list. For instance: 1(208)
corresponds to 208 ngrams (variants) of length 1.

larities between 80 randomly4 selected Obsecro Te
texts. The similarity is measured in terms of word
overlap. Strong similarities are shown by the dark
red colour, while weak similarities by dark blue.
Figure 2 shows that none of the 80 sampled Ob-
secro Te texts are identical. This empirical finding
confirms the observations of Clark and supports
the idea that different copies of the prayer Obse-
cro Te differ substantially from one another.

6.2 Automatic Variant Extraction

In this section, we aim at evaluating unsupervised
approaches to variant extraction. Hence, no clue,
such as verse or segment alignment, is considered
in variant modelling. This leads to the assumption
that any ngram extracted from the corpus is a vari-
ant candidate. The side effect of this assumption
is its error productivity while many ngrams are not
variants.

Table 2 illustrates the results of the imple-
mented approaches. Edit distance shows the best
results for unigram variants. Nonetheless, its per-
formance significantly drops when variants are of
length greater than 1. This can be explained by the
large number of permutations that are not identi-
fied by Edit distance.

Jaccard Index obtains better results than Edit
distance for ngrams greater than 1, which means
that conversely to Edit distance, it better handles
the permutation phenomenon. Our adaptation of
the bag of words approach (BOW (LL)) using
log-likelihood shows the best results on the entire
evaluation list (ALL). This indicates that BOW
(LL) better handles variants of variable length.
The lower results of BOW (MI) and BOW (OR)

4The number of texts was limited to 80 to enable a clear
visualisation of the results. The same behaviour was observed
over the entire Obsecro Te dataset.

Rare Variants Category

salvationem / salvatione inflectional

victoria / victoriam inflectional

viserum / viscerum orthographic

dolose / dolore lexical substitution

gaudii / gaudio inflectional

ancilla tua / famulo tuo lexical substitution + inflectional (f./ m.)

michi annuncies / annuncies michi permutation

sensum erigat mores imponat reduction

/ mores componat + lexical substitution

Frequent Variants Category

gaudia / gaudio inflectional (f./ m.)

misericordie / gratie lexical substitution (Adjective)

domina / virgo lexical substitution (Noun)

cordis dolorem / dolorem cordis permutation

a dilecto filio / de filio lexical substitution + reduction

regat / custodiat lexical substitution (Verb)

super / per lexical substitution (Preposition)

Table 3: Examples of extracted Obsecro Te variants.

lead to the assumption that these two associa-
tion measures fail to capture strong ngram asso-
ciation relations. The lack of training data can
also explain this behaviour. The word embed-
ding approach (w2v) shows the best Map scores
for ngrams greater than 1. This suggests that w2v
is the most appropriate when variants are not uni-
grams. The lower results for unigrams can be ex-
plained by the nature of the embedding models.
Indeed, w2v and fastText are pre-trained models
and many Obsecro Te words are not present in
these models. Finally, a linear combination of the
approaches has been carried out without signifi-
cant improvements.

If some phenomena can be detected such as syn-
forms at the word level (with Edit distance for uni-
grams), permutations using Jaccard index, or lexi-
cal substitution using bag of words and embedding
vector approaches, other phenomena are more dif-



246

ficult to handle, such as expansion and reduction
variants where the two segments are of variable
length. We also report that some words and ex-
pressions are often substituted by connectors (et,
a, que, de, in...), such as sanctam / et, de filio tuo /
a, vulneratum / et, in omnibus / et in. Very frequent
connectors represent one of the most difficult vari-
ants to extract as they show a big discrepancy of
distribution between the two elements.

6.3 Qualitative Variant Analysis

Variant categories can be analysed based on Edit
distance, Jaccard Index, BoW and Embedding
scores as follow: (i) if Edit distance score is lower
than few characters (generally 3), we can effec-
tively pinpoint, thanks to a regular expression, one
of the three synformic categories (orthographic,
inflectional or derivational); (ii) if Jaccard index
score is equal to 0, we face a permutation; (iii)
if we combine two criteria, i.e., high Edit distance
score and low Jaccard index score, we extract vari-
ants that exhibit both expansion and permutation;
(iv) lexical substitution variants can be extracted
using BoW or Word embedding approaches. A
high cosine similarity score has also been used
to give more confidence about lexical substitution
variants.

Based on the observation that a large number of
variants (406) appears in less than five copies of
Obsecro Te, we divide our analysis into two parts:
rare variants and frequent variants. Table 3 reports
some examples of variants identified by our au-
tomatic extraction. For rare variant pairs (salva-
tionem / salvatione, for instance), each reported
left side variant appears only in one copy, while its
right side counterpart variant appears in hundreds
of copies. Rare variants may indicate either a rare
usage or a misspelling error. On the other hand,
frequent variants may offer a high confidence in
their usage.

We observe inflectional variants as rare or fre-
quent variants: salvationem (singular accusative)
and victoria (singular) appear only once in the cor-
pus, while salvatione (singular ablative) and victo-
riam (singular accusative) appear respectively 961
and 966 times. In one case the accusative mode is
used, while in the other, the ablative is used. Mis-
spellings as rare variants: viserum and vicerum are
both misspellings of viscerum. Lexical substitu-
tion applies mostly to frequent variants and leads
to semantic variants. Synonym lexical substitu-

Rare (freq=1) Frequent (freq >500 )

in me instruat (Savoy) instituat

ancilla tua n (Netherlands) famulo tuo

sensum sursum dirigat (Paris) cursum dirigat

famule tue leonarde (Provence) famulo tuo

aliis rebus quas (Val d’Oise) illis rebus in quibus

in cruce denudatum (Netherlands) ante crucem nudatum

siscientem ac hely (Paris) sicientem fel apponi

mea et desideria (Paris) et desideria mea

venias et festine (Netherlands) veni et festina

bene per me (Amiens) me bene per

omni auxilio consilio (Netherlands) omni consilio

cursum meum regat (Besançon) cursum dirigat

scicientem fel aponi (Bourges) sicientem fel apponi

venias et sustines (Valenciennes) veni et festina

pace omni salvatione (Besançon) omni salvatione pace

petitionibus et requestis (Western Fr ) orationibus et requestis

et etiam abundantiam (Val d’Oise) etiam habundantiam

in omnibus etiam (Central France) et in omnibus

deus filius tuus (Netherlands) filius dei

mentem sensum et (Netherlands) mentem erigat

gratie et salutis (Paris) salutis et gratie

in ea elevatum (Netherlands) in ipsa levatum

regat et mentem (Paris) regat mentem

veni et festinam (Rouen) veni et festina

probet et vota (Mons) probet vota

cursum sensum erigat (Paris) cursum dirigat

honnestam et honnourabilem (Mons) honestam et honorabilem

venies et festinas (Netherlands) veni et festina

meum in consilium (Rouen) et consilium

horam et diem (Netherlands) diem et horam

Table 4: Examples of 3 gram variants. First column
shows variants that appear only once. Column 2 shows
the corresponding frequent variants.

tion, such as domina /virgo, is encountered in ev-
ery grammatical category (noun, verb, adjective,
preposition). One exception is the rare variant an-
cilla tua / famulo tuo, the result of two linguistic
operations, lexical substitution and inflection, that
may refer to a customisation of Books of Hours
according to its owner, either a woman or a man.
We expect that looking to the whole text of Books
of Hours and increasing the number of Books of
Hours, this variant will be more frequent. Indeed,
Books of Hours are personal objects, and are not
intended to be shared. Finally, the last example of
rare variants shows the application of two lexical
operations, reduction and lexical substitution.

Figure 3 illustrates the number of Obsecro Te
(and therefore, Books of Hours) produced between
1375 and 1530 and used in this experiment5. This

5Given that the Books of Hours are not dated by their
scribes, a date range is generally devised by scholars. The



247

Figure 3: Number of Obsecro Te prayers per year

Figure 4: Obsecro Te per Year: 3gram variants over
temporal axis

Figure 5: Obsecro Te Origin: 3gram variants over geo-
graphical axis

corpus in (Plummer and Clark, 2015) has a strong focus on
the mid-fifteenth century, with a maximum of 80 copies as-
cribed to the year 1455. Figure 3 illustrates the number of
witnesses by year using the arithmetic mean between the ex-
treme dates, which explains the peaks on round numbers, par-

corpus illustrates how the production of Books of
Hours increased until the second half of the fif-
teenth century and decreased afterwards. A larger
corpus suggests that production reached it high-
est level during the last third of the fifteenth cen-
tury (Stutzmann, 2019). An empirical overview
through approximately a century and half of Book
of Hours production, does not allow to draw a di-
rect relation in the diachronic change of Obsecro
Te prayer copies. Nonetheless, our method allows
to target a variant category and to observe its years
of use and origins. Table 4 provides some exam-
ples of rare 3gram variants of which it is not al-
ways obvious to assign a linguistic category. We
can notice that rare 3gram variants are often ex-
pansion of frequent bigrams omni auxilio consilio
/ omni consilio. Figures 4 and 5 illustrate the use
of rare orthographic 3gram variants that have less
than ten character substitutions (respectively per
year and per origin). This is performed by fix-
ing the edit distance score to 10 (which means a
maximum of ten substitutions) and choosing only
the variants that appear only once in the corpus.
We obtain for instance, the variant pair obtained
by lexical substitution petitionibus et requestis /
orationibus et requestis, where the former appears
only once and the latter appears 983 times. From
a geographic perspective, Netherlands is the coun-
try that produces this synformic category followed
by Paris. Both places are the ones producing the

ticularly those ending in 0 and 5, and the important variation
from one year to another



248

largest number of copies, so that it comes as no
surprise that scribes generates more variants, in-
cluding the rare ones that we have isolated here.
From a temporal perspective, however, we see that
3gram variants mostly appeared in 1465 and 1470.
This is unexpected, since the maximum number of
manuscripts in the corpus is for the years 1450 and
1455. This increase is perhaps correlated with the
higher production levels of Books of Hours in the
last third of the century (not strictly represented in
Clark’s corpus) whose variety would be reflected
in Clark’s corpus, but this would not explain why
the 1460s and 1470s are more variant than the end
of the century. We may now formulate an original
hypothesis, that we observe here a loosening of
the copying discipline for the Obsecro Te as a very
common text, perhaps due to the multiplication of
workshops or to other causes such as text memo-
risation, resulting in the emergence of many new,
isolated variants. Even though our analysis cannot
draw factual conclusions for now, it can nonethe-
less guide experts to analyse such phenomena.

7 Conclusion

We conducted for the first time a large-scale study
of medieval devotional texts for the purpose of
variant analysis. We used linguistic operations
rather than edition operations to characterise vari-
ants in order to facilitate the interpretation of vari-
ants. We also design a suitable methodology for
their detection that we hope will help medievalists
in their research. If the automatic variant extrac-
tion is encouraging, further investigations are cer-
tainly needed to distinguish between orthographic
in one hand, and inflectional and derivative vari-
ants in the other hand. Some computational meth-
ods well designed to deal with a particular variant
detection fail when they face problematic cases:
word embedding approach does not succeed to de-
tect lexical substitutions showing a difference of
distributions between the two elements, typically
those substitutions that imply connectors. None of
the methods is adapted to discover expansion and
reduction at the n-gram level. This work consti-
tutes a first step in the automatic study the con-
tent of Book of Hours in order to discover tempo-
ral and geographical correlations between Books
of Hours, whether issued from different regions
of the same country or from different countries of
medieval Europe.

Acknowledgments

This work is part of the HORAE project (Hours
- Recognition, Analysis, Editions) and is sup-
ported by the French National Research Agency
under grant ANR-17-CE38-0008. We would like
to thank professor Gregory Clark for making avail-
able Obsecro Te dataset and the annotations of
variants.

References
Sanjeev Arora, Liang Yingyu, and Ma Tengyu. 2017.

A simple but tough to beat baseline for sentence
embeddings. In Proceedings of the 17th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR’17), pages 1–11.

Batrice Daille. 2017. Term Variation in Specialised
Corpora: Characterisation, automatic discovery
and applications, volume 19 of Terminology and
Lexicography Research and Practice. John Ben-
jamins.

Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics
of surprise and coincidence. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(1):61–74.

Stefan Evert. 2005. The statistics of word cooccur-
rences : word pairs and collocations. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Stuttgart.

Robert M. Fano. 1961. Transmission of Information: A
Statistical Theory of Communications. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Z. S. Harris. 1971. Structures mathématiques du lan-
gage. Dunod. Traduit de l’Américain par C. Fuchs.

Sandra Hindman and James H. Marrow. 2013. Books
of hours reconsidered. Harvey Miller Publishers,
London.

Paul Jaccard. 1901. tude comparative de la distribution
florale dans une portion des alpes et des jura. Bul-
letin de la Socit Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles,
37:547–579.

Ana Kocic. 2008. The problem of synforms. Facta
Universitatis, 6(1):51–59.

Batia Laufer. 1988. The concept of synforms (similar
lexical forms) in vocabulary acquisition. Language
and Education, 2(2):113–132.

V. I Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of cor-
recting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Cyber-
netics and Control Theory, 10(8):707–710.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling,

https://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/10019961020/en/
https://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/10019961020/en/
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5021-distributed-representations-of-words-and-phrases-and-their-compositionality.pdf
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5021-distributed-representations-of-words-and-phrases-and-their-compositionality.pdf
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5021-distributed-representations-of-words-and-phrases-and-their-compositionality.pdf


249

Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
26, pages 3111–3119. Curran Associates, Inc.

John Plummer and Gregory T. Clark. 2015. Obsecro
te. Beyond Use: A Digital Database of Vari-
ant Readings In Late Medieval Books of Hours.
http://www6.sewanee.edu/BeyondUse/
texts_list.phptexts=ObsecroTe.

Gerard Salton and Michael E. Lesk. 1968. Computer
evaluation of indexing and text processing. Jour-
nal of the Association for Computational Machin-
ery, 15(1):8–36.

Dominique. Stutzmann. 2019. Résistance au change-
ment ? les écritures des livres d’heures dans l’espace
français (1200-1600). In ’Change’ in Medieval and
Renaissance Scripts and Manuscripts. Proceedings
of the 19th Colloquium of the Comit international de
palographie latine (Berlin, 16-18 September, 2015).,
pages 101–120, Turnhout. Brepols.

Roger. Wieck. 1988. Time sanctified : the Book of
Hours in medieval art and life. G. Braziller, New
York.

http://www6.sewanee.edu/BeyondUse/texts_list.phptexts=ObsecroTe
http://www6.sewanee.edu/BeyondUse/texts_list.phptexts=ObsecroTe

