



















































VerbNet Representations: Subevent Semantics for Transfer Verbs


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 154–163
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

154

VerbNet Representations: Subevent Semantics for Transfer Verbs

Susan Windisch Brown
University of Colorado

brownsw@colorado.edu

Julia Bonn
University of Colorado

bonnj@colorado.edu

James Gung
University of Colorado

james.gung@colorado.edu

Annie Zaenen
Stanford University

azaenen@stanford.edu

James Pustejovsky
Brandeis University

jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu

Martha Palmer
University of Colorado

mpalmer@colorado.edu

Abstract

This paper announces the release of a new ver-
sion of the English lexical resource VerbNet
with substantially revised semantic represen-
tations designed to facilitate computer plan-
ning and reasoning based on human language.
We use the transfer of possession and trans-
fer of information event representations to il-
lustrate both the general framework of the
representations and the types of nuances the
new representations can capture. These repre-
sentations use a Generative Lexicon-inspired
subevent structure to track attributes of event
participants across time, highlighting opposi-
tions and temporal and causal relations among
the subevents.

1 Introduction

Many natural language processing tasks have seen
rapid advancement in recent years using deep
learning methods; however, those tasks that re-
quire precise tracking of event sequences and par-
ticipants across a discourse still perform better
using explicit representations of the meanings of
each sentence or utterance. To be most useful
for automatic language understanding and genera-
tion, such representations need to be both automat-
ically derivable from text and reasonably format-
ted for computer analysis and planning systems.
For applications like robotics or interactions with
avatars, commonsense inferences needed to under-
stand human language directions or interactions
are often not derivable directly from the utterance.
Tracking intrinsic and extrinsic states of entities,
such as their existence, location or functionality,
currently requires explicit statements with precise
temporal sequencing.

In this paper, we describe new semantic rep-
resentations for the lexical resource VerbNet that
provide this sort of information for thousands of

verb senses and introduce a means for automati-
cally translating text to these representations. We
explore the format of these representations and the
types of information they track by thoroughly ex-
amining the representations for transfer of posses-
sions and information. These event types are ex-
cellent examples of complex events with multi-
ple participants and relations between them that
change across the time frame of the event. By
aligning our new representations more closely
with the dynamic event structure encapsulated by
the Generative Lexicon, we can provide a more
precise subevent structure that makes the changes
over time explicit (Pustejovsky, 1995; Pustejovsky
et al., 2016). Who has what when and who knows
what when are exactly the sorts of things that we
want to extract from text, but this extraction is dif-
ficult without explicit, computationally-tractable
representations. These event types also make up a
substantial portion of VerbNet: 37 classes of verbs
deal with change of possession and transfer of in-
formation out of VerbNet’s 300+ classes, covering
810 verbs.

2 Background

The language resource VerbNet (Kipper et al.,
2006) is a hierarchical, wide-coverage verb lexi-
con that groups verbs into classes based on sim-
ilarities in their syntactic and semantic behavior
(Schuler, 2005). Each class in VerbNet includes
a set of member verbs, the thematic roles used
in the predicate-argument structure of these mem-
bers (Bonial et al., 2011), and the class-specific
selectional preferences for those roles. The class
also provides a set of typical syntactic patterns and
corresponding semantic representations. A verb
can be a member of multiple classes; for exam-
ple, run is a member of 8 VerbNet classes, in-
cluding the run-51.3.2 class (he ran to the store)



155

and the function-105.2.1 class (the car isn’t run-
ning). These memberships usually correspond to
coarse-grained senses of the verb. The resource
was originally based on Levin’s (1993) analysis of
English verbs but has since been expanded to in-
clude dozens of additional classes and hundreds of
additional verbs and verb senses.

VerbNet representations previously formed the
basis for Parameterized Action Representation
(PAR) providing a conceptual representation of
different types of actions (Badler et al., 1999).
These actions involve changes of state, changes
of location, and exertion of force and can be used
to animate human avatars in a virtual 3D environ-
ment (R. Bindiganavale and Palmer, 2000). They
are particularly well suited for motion and con-
tact verb classes, providing an abstract, language-
independent representation (Kipper and Palmer,
2000). The more precise temporal sequencing de-
scribed here is even more suitable as a foundation
for natural language instructions and human-robot
or human-avatar interactions.

2.1 VerbNet

VerbNet has long been used in NLP for seman-
tic role labeling and other inference-enabling tasks
(Shi and Mihalcea, 2005; Giuglea and Moschitti,
2006; Loper et al., 2007; Bos, 2008). In addi-
tion, automatic disambiguation of a verb’s Verb-
Net class has been used as a stand-in for verb sense
disambiguation (Abend et al., 2008; Brown et al.,
2014; Croce et al., 2012; Kawahara and Palmer,
2014).

VerbNet’s semantic representations use a
Davidsonian first-order-logic formulation that
incorporates the thematic roles of the class. Each
frame in a class is labeled with a flat syntactic
pattern (e.g., NP V NP). The ”syntax” that follows
shows how the thematic roles for that class appear
in that pattern (e.g., Agent V Patient), much
like the argument role constructions of Goldberg
(2006). A previous revision of the VerbNet se-
mantic representations made the correspondence
of these patterns to constructions more explicit
by using a common predicate (i.e., path rel) for
all caused-motion construction frames(Hwang,
2014). At the request of some users, we are sub-
stituting more specific predicates for the general
path rel predicate, such as has location, has state
and has possession, although the subevent pat-
terns continue to show the commonality across

these caused-motion frames.
Each frame also includes a semantic represen-

tation that uses basic predicates to show the rela-
tionships between the thematic role arguments and
to track any changes over the time course of the
event. Thematic roles that appear in the ”syntax”
should always appear somewhere in the semantic
representation. Overall, this linking in each frame
of the syntactic pattern to a semantic representa-
tion is a unique feature of VerbNet that emphasizes
the close interplay of syntax and semantics.

2.2 Revision of the Semantic Representations

VerbNet’s old representations included an event
variable E as an argument to the predicates.
Representations of states were indicated with
either a bare E, as for the own-100 class:
has possession(E, Pivot, Theme), or During(E),
as for the contiguous location-47.8 class (Italy
borders France): contact(During(E), Theme, Co-
Theme). Most classes having to do with change,
such as changes in location, changes in state and
changes in possession, used a path rel predicate
in combination with Start(E), During(E), and
End/Result(E) to show the transition from one
location or state to another (1).

(1) The rabbit hopped across the lawn.
Theme V Trajectory
motion(during(E), Theme)
path rel(start(E), Theme, ?Initial location1,
CH OF LOC, prep)
path rel(during(E), Theme, Trajectory,
CH OF LOC, prep)
path rel(end(E), Theme, ?Destination,
CH OF LOC, prep)

Efforts to use VerbNet’s semantic representa-
tions (Zaenen et al., 2008; Narayan-Chen et al.,
2017), however, indicated a need for greater con-
sistency and expressiveness. We have addressed
consistency on several fronts. First, all neces-
sary participants are accounted for in the repre-
sentations, whether they are instantiated in the
syntax, incorporated in the verb itself (e.g., to
drill), or simply logically necessary (e.g., all en-
tities that change location begin in an initial loca-
tion, whether it is commonly mentioned or not).

1A question mark in front of a thematic role indicates a
role that appears in the syntax in some frames for the class
but not in this particular frame.



156

Second, similar event types are represented with
a similar format; for example, all states are rep-
resented with E, never with During(E). Finally,
predicates are given formal definitions that apply
across classes.

In order to clarify what is happening at each
stage of an event, we turned to the Generative
Lexicon (Pustejovsky, 1995) for an explicit the-
ory of subevent structure. Classic GL character-
izes the different Aktionsarten in terms of struc-
tured subevents, with states represented with a
simple e, processes as a sequence of states char-
acterizing values of some attribute, e1...en, and
transitions describing the opposition inherent in
achievements and accomplishments. In subse-
quent work within GL, event structure has been
integrated with dynamic semantic models in order
to more explicitly represent the attribute modified
in the course of the event (the location of the mov-
ing entity, the extent of a created or destroyed en-
tity, etc.) as a sequence of states related to time
points or intervals. This Dynamic Event Model
(Pustejovsky and Moszkowicz, 2011; Pustejovsky,
2013) explicitly labels the transitions that move an
event from frame to frame.

Applying the Dynamic Event Model to Verb-
Net semantic representations allowed us refine the
event sequences by expanding the previous tripar-
tite division of Start(E), During(E), and End(E) to
an indefinite number of subevents. These num-
bered subevents allow very precise tracking of par-
ticipants across time and a nuanced representation
of causation and action sequencing within a sin-
gle event. In the general case, e1 occurs before e2,
which occurs before e3, and so on. We’ve intro-
duced predicates that indicate temporal and causal
relations between the subevents, such as cause(ei,
ej) and co-temporal(ei, ej).

We have made other refinements suggested by
the GL Dynamic Event Model. For example,
we greatly expanded the use of negated predi-
cates to make explicit the opposition occurring
in events involving change: e.g., John died is
analyzed as the opposition 〈alive(e1,Patient), ¬
alive(e2,Patient)〉. Compare the new representa-
tion for changes of location in (2) to (1) above. In
(2), we use the opposition between has location
and ¬has location to make clear that once the
Theme is motion (in e2), it is no longer in the
Initial location. In order to distinguish the event
type associated with a semantic predicate, we in-

troduced a new event variable, ë, to distinguish
a process from other types of subevents, such as
states. For example, see the motion predicate in
(2).

(2) The rabbit hopped across the lawn.
Theme V Trajectory
has location(e1, Theme, ?Initial Location)
motion(ë2, Theme, Trajectory)
¬has location(e2, Theme, ?Initial location)
has location(e3, Theme, ?Destination)

Although people infer that an entity is no longer
at its initial location once motion has begun, com-
puters need explicit mention of this fact to accu-
rately track the location of an entity. Similarly,
some states hold throughout an event, while others
do not. Our new representations make these dis-
tinctions clear, where pre-event, while-event, and
post-event conditions are distinguished formally in
the representation.

Elsewhere (Brown et al., 2018), we discuss in
more detail the Dynamic Event Model, show the
effect of the new subevent structure on the inter-
pretation of the role of the Agent, and give fur-
ther examples of the new change of location and
change of state representations.

3 Change of Possession

In this section, we closely examine the represen-
tations for events involving changes in posses-
sion. These representations illustrate the greater
clarity and flexibility we have gained by adopting
the conventions described in section 2. They also
show some of the choices we have made to capture
the underlying semantics while maintaining a con-
nection to the varying surface forms. We discuss
both one-way transfers (give) and two-way trans-
fers (sell). We also address the different perspec-
tives verbs can impose on a transfer event, such as
the difference between Mary gave John the book
and John obtained the book from Mary, in which
the Agent of the event is the Source or the Recipi-
ent of the item, respectively. These variations have
interesting analogs in the Transfer of Information
classes (Fig. 1), which we discuss in Section 4.

The semantic representations for changes of
possession in VerbNet assume a literal, non-
metaphoric use of the verbs in question. Metaphor
may select only some of the source domain’s par-
ticipants or entailments. For example, She stole



157

Figure 1: Primary distinctions made in the VerbNet
representations for events involving transfer

John’s car entails that John no longer has pos-
session of his car, whereas She stole John’s heart
does not entail his loss of a vital organ. An analy-
sis of VerbNet classes in terms of their application
to figurative language (Brown and Palmer, 2012)
showed that some classes concern only metaphoric
uses of their member verbs (e.g., calibratible cos-
45.6.1), with semantic representations that directly
represent the figurative meaning without reference
to the source domain. Many classes, however,
were shown to refer to literal uses of the verbs,
although it was suggested that transformations or
re-interpretations of the semantic representations
could be possible.

3.1 Previous Representations
The previous model allowed only three temporal
subevent periods: Start, During, and End. For
both Change of Possession and Transfer of In-
formation classes, each possession received one
path rel for the Start period and one for the End
period, allowing one clear owner per period. For
Change of Possession, it was reasonable to as-
sume that possession transferred fully during the
event, and as such, information about who did
not possess a thing at any point could have been
inferred through a rule. This model was suffi-
cient for Change of Possession classes in and of
themselves, but failed to capture any contrast with
Transfer of Information classes, for which this as-
sumption does not hold.

The cause predicate included arguments for an
Agent or Causer (no other thematic roles were al-
lowed), and the overall event E. This was sufficient

for one-way transfers in which one party was re-
sponsible for initiating the entire change, but was
insufficient when more than one transfer occurred.
There was no way to show that one party could
initiate one transfer while another party initiated
another. Two-way transfer representations either
attributed all causation to one party, or omitted the
cause predicate entirely. The ability to omit the
predicate led one to wonder why it was ever nec-
essary to include it.

3.2 New Representations
Three predicates form the core of the change of
possession representations:

• has possession(e, [slot-1], [slot-2])
• transfer(e, [slot-1], [slot-2], [slot-3])
• cause(ei, ej)

We define has possession broadly as involving
ownership or control over a thing; e.g., I have a
pencil can mean either you own a pencil or you
(possibly temporarily) have use of a pencil. Within
the predicate, slot-1 is reserved for the posses-
sor and can take thematic roles Source, Recipient,
Goal, Agent, and Co-Agent. Slot-2 is reserved for
the possession, and can take roles Theme and As-
set.

Transfer is now a causative predicate, describ-
ing an event in which possession of a thing trans-
fers from one possessor to another. All three par-
ticipants are given as arguments. Slot-1 is reserved
for the possessor who initiates the transfer, and can
take thematic roles Agent and Co-Agent. Slot-2 is
reserved for the possession (Theme or Asset), and
slot-3 is reserved for the other possessor (Source,
Recipient/Goal, Agent, and Co-Agent).

The order of arguments within this predicate of-
ten aligns with the temporal order of possession,
but this is incidental. Sometimes, an Agent who is
initiating a transfer is the recipient of that trans-
fer; in these cases, the Agent will still occupy slot-
1, even though they end up with possession last. It
is also possible for an Agent to occupy slot-3 if an-
other party (Co-Agent) is initiating the transfer.
The subevent numbering of the has possession
predicates before and after the transfer provide a
full description of the temporal order of posses-
sion.

The new basic representation is shown in (3).

(3) has possession(e1, Source, Theme)
¬has possession(e1, Recipient, Theme)



158

transfer(e2, Source, Theme, Recipient)
has possession(e3, Recipient, Theme)
¬has possession(e3, Source, Theme)
cause(e2, e3)

This representation contains an initial state
subevent, a transfer subevent, and a resulting state
subevent. Cause(e2, e3) tells us that the trans-
fer triggers the resulting state. The opposing
¬has possession predicates show without a doubt
that the Source stops having possession as soon as
the transfer occurs, and the Recipient does not take
possession until then. This allows for clear auto-
matic tracking of an entity’s ownership status and
provides an important contrast with the new Trans-
fer of Information representations. It will also al-
low coverage of cases of shared ownership of pos-
sessions, if VerbNet expands in that direction.

3.3 Change of Possession Variations
Agents as Sources or Recipients: Depending
on the class, an Agent may function as Source
or Recipient. In the old representations, some
classes ended up including as core roles both an
Agent and a Recipient, or an Agent and a Source,
even if those roles always overlapped in the syn-
tax. This was likely due to pressure to include
in the class thematic roles that were projected by
the main predicates, path rel, cause and trans-
fer. In the new model, we let Agent stand in for
whichever role it overlaps throughout the repre-
sentation. This eliminates the need for the equals
predicate, and has allowed us to eliminate syntac-
tically redundant roles from the class role invento-
ries.

Six classes demonstrate one-way transfers in
which the entity who starts with possession
initiates giving that possession away: cheat-
10.6.1, contribute-13.2, equip-13.4.2, fulfilling-
13.4.1, future having-13.3, and give-13.1-1. In
example (4) from fulfilling-13.4.1, Agent replaces
Source throughout.

(4) Brown presented a plaque to Jones
Agent V Theme Recipient
has possession(e1, Agent, Theme)
¬has possession(e1, Recipient, Theme)
transfer(e2, Agent, Theme, Recipient)
has possession(e3, Recipient, Theme)
¬has possession(e3, Agent, Theme)
cause(e2, e3)

Five classes demonstrate one-way transfers in
which an entity who does not have possession of

a thing initiates taking that thing from the origi-
nal possessor: berry-13.7, deprive-10.6.2, obtain-
13.5.2, rob-10.6.4, and steal-10.5. The example
from steal-10.5 in (5) shows how Agent replaces
Recipient.

(5) They stole the painting from the museum
Agent V Theme Source
has possession(e1, Source, Theme)
¬has possession(e1, Agent, Theme)
transfer(e2, Agent, Theme, Source)
has possession(e3, Agent, Theme)
¬has possession(e3, Source, Theme)
cause(e2, e3)

Four main classes and two additional subclasses
belonging to classes listed above demonstrate
two-way transfers: exchange-13.6.1, get-13.5.1,
invest-13.5.4, and pay-68, as well as give-13.1-
1 and obtain-13.5.2-1. In the following example
from exchange-13.6.1, note the new handling of
subevents, cause, and the argument structure of
transfer. In e2, the Agent initiates the transfer of
the Theme, and in e3, the Co-Agent initiates the
transfer of the Co-Theme. Subevent e2 causes the
resulting possession states of the Theme, and e3
causes the resulting possession states of the Co-
Theme.

(6) Gwen exchanged the dress for a shirt
Agent V Theme Co-Theme
has possession(e1, Agent, Theme)
¬has possession(e1, ?Co-Agent, Theme)
has possession(e1, ?Co-Agent, Co-Theme)
¬has possession(e1, Agent, Co-Theme)
transfer(e2, Agent, Theme, ?Co-Agent)
transfer(e3, ?Co-Agent, Co-Theme, Agent)
has possession(e4, ?Co-Agent, Theme)
¬has possession(e4, Agent, Theme)
has possession(e5, Agent, Co-Theme)
¬has possession(e5, ?Co-Agent, Co-
Theme)
cause(e2, e4)
cause(e3, e5)

Substitute-13.6.2 used to be included in this
group, but since it was specifically split off from
exchange-13.6.1 to deal with a two-way exchange
of location (i.e., two entities change places with
each other), we are now treating it purely as a
Change of Location class rather than Change of
Possession. When compared with (6), example (7)
from substitute-13.6.2 highlights the distinctions



159

we are able to achieve using the new Change of
Location vs. Change of Possession treatments.

(7) One bell ringer swapped places with another
Theme V Location Co-Theme
has location(e1, Theme, Location I)
has location(e2, Co-Theme, Location J)
motion(ë3, Theme, Trajectory)
¬has location(e3, Theme, Location I)
motion(ë4, Co-Theme, Trajectory)
¬has location(e4, Co-Theme, Location J)
has location(e5, Theme, Location J)
has location(e6, Co-Theme, Location I)
cause(ë3, e5)
cause(ë4, e6)

Additional predicates: Several subgroups within
Change of Possession use additional predicates to
depict additional semantics. Future-having-13.3
and berry-13.7 both take an irrealis(e) predicate
to show that the transfer and resulting states are
intended, but not guaranteed to have taken place
yet. Irrealis’s single argument is a subevent num-
ber, and one predicate is given per qualifying
subevent. Another additional predicate is used
in the get-13.5.1, give-13.1-1, obtain-13.5.2, and
pay-68 classes. These all involve two-way trans-
fers in which a Theme is exchanged for an Asset,
where the Asset is the cost of the Theme, repre-
sented as cost(Theme, Asset). Finally, rob-10.6.4
and steal-10.5 both involve an Agent/Recipient
who initiates taking a possession in an illegal man-
ner. The representations include a manner(e, Ille-
gal, Agent) predicate which, for this usage, takes
Illegal as a constant.

4 Transfer of Information

4.1 Previous Representations

In the old model, the only consistent difference
between Transfer of Information and Change of
Possession in terms of predicates and represen-
tation structure lay within path rel, which con-
tained a constant called either TR OF INFO or
CH OF POSS, respectively. Like Change of Pos-
session, only one path rel was provided per tem-
poral period, allowing only one clear possessor per
period. Unfortunately, this failed to capture the
important distinctions that knowledge is generally
not lost when communicated, and one party’s pos-
session and communication of knowledge is no

guarantee that another party doesn’t already pos-
sess it too.

4.2 New Representations
Two new predicates describe Transfer of Informa-
tion:

• has information(e, [slot-1], [slot-2])
• transfer info(e, [slot-1], [slot-2], [slot-3])

These mirror the predicates used in Change of
Possession in terms of their argument slots and
functions, excepting that slot-2 may take Theme
or Topic but not Asset. Topic is used most com-
monly for verbal information, while Theme is re-
served for non-verbal information, which often re-
flects assent or emotional states.

The basic representation in (8) differs from
Change of Possession in terms of the boundaries
on possession before and after the transfer info
subevent. Here, by leaving the Recipient’s pos-
session status underspecified in e1, we make no
claims about whether or not the Recipient already
knew the information at the beginning of the event.
By marking the Source’s possession status with a
big E, we assert that the Source maintains posses-
sion of the information throughout the event, even
after the transfer info communication subevent.

(8) has information(E, Source, Topic)
transfer info(e1, Source, Topic, Recipient)
has information(e2, Recipient, Topic)
cause(e1, e2)

4.3 Transfer of Information Variations
One-way transfers: Just as with Change of
Possession, Transfer of Information classes may
involve an Agentive Source or Agentive Recip-
ient. The basic representations for these types
alternate from the basic Transfer of Information
representation in the same way demonstrated
above, with Agent replacing either Source or
Recipient throughout. The vast majority of Trans-
fer of Information classes are of the Agentive
Source type, including advise-37.9, complain-
37.8, confess-37.10, crane-40.3.2, curtsey-40.3.3,
initiate communication-37.4.2, inquire-37.1.2,
instr communication-37.4.1, interrogate-37.1.3,
lecture-37.11, manner speaking-37.3, nonver-
bal expression-40.2, overstate-37.12, promise-
37.13, say-37.7, tell-37.2, transfer mesg-37.1.1,
and wink-40.3.1. Just one class, learn-14, features
an Agentive Recipient.



160

Two-way transfers: The two-way Transfer of
Information classes, chit chat-37.6 and talk-37.5,
differ from the two-way Change of Possession
classes in several ways. Most notably, they are
not limited to a single transfer in each direction;
instead, a sequence of transfers repeats back and
forth between the two participants an unspeci-
fied number of times. The subevent ordering is
changed so that the state resulting from one trans-
fer info occurs before the next transfer info be-
gins. The repeated turn-taking is expressed using
the repeated sequence predicate, which may take
as many subevent arguments as necessary to cap-
ture the full span of the repeated behavior. The
example in (9) is from chit chat-37.6.

(9) Susan chitchatted with Rachel about the
problem
Agent V Co-Agent Topic
has information(E, Agent, Topic I)
has information(E, Co-Agent, Topic J)
transfer info(e1, Agent, Topic I, Co-Agent)
has information(e2, Co-Agent, Topic I)
transfer info(ee3, Co-Agent, Topic J,
Agent)
has information(e4, Agent, Topic J)
cause(e1, e2)
cause(e3, e4)
repeated sequence(e1, e2, e3, e4)

Additional predicates and selectional restric-
tions: Several subgroups within Transfer of In-
formation capture further semantic details us-
ing either additional predicates or specialized
selectional restrictions on class roles. Two
classes feature verbs of asking: inquire-37.1.2 and
interrogate-37.1.3. These classes take a Topic role
with a selectional restriction [+question], which
helps clarify that the communication event taking
place regards the question and never the response.
Manner speaking-37.3 and nonverbal expression-
40.2 both feature verbs that describe the manner
of communication. The representations use an-
other manner predicate, this time with a verb-
specific role V Manner in place of a constant.
Instr communication-37.4 features verbs that de-
scribe an instrument used to communicate (e.g.,
phone), and uses utilize(e, Agent, V Instrument)
to convey this.

Two subgroups use Theme with selectional
restriction [+nonverbal information]. The first
group involves communication via some sort of

voluntary bodily motion named by the verb, in-
cluding classes crane-40.3.2, curtsey-40.3.3, and
wink-40.3.1. In addition to the basic trans-
fer info predicates, these classes take a Patient
role that is shown to be a body part of the Agent
with a part of(Patient, Agent) predicate. Dur-
ing the course of the transfer info subevent, the
Agent moves the Patient into a verb-specific po-
sition, represented using has position(e, Patient,
V Position) and body motion(ë, Agent). These
classes have a more nuanced take on the posses-
sion boundaries than the basic representation in
(8). In example (10) from wink-40.3.1, the Theme
is a nonverbal emotional state conveyed through a
bodily motion. We can generally assume that the
Recipient does not have prior access to this type of
information, and we make this explicit in e1.

(10) Linda nodded her agreement
Agent V Theme
has information(E, Agent, Theme)
¬has information(e1, ?Recipient, Theme)
¬has position(e1, ?Patient , V Position)
transfer info(ë2, Agent, Theme, ?Recipi-
ent)
body motion(ë2, Agent)
has position(e2, ?Patient , V Position)
has information(e3, ?Recipient, Theme)
part of(?Patient , Agent)
cause(ë2, e3)

The second group involves potentially invol-
untary nonverbal expressions of an internal state,
and includes classes animal sounds-38 and non-
verbal expression-40.2 (11). As part of this re-
lease, we have added a new Stimulus thematic
role to these classes. The previous release in-
cluded frames for constructions using a Recipient,
like Paul laughed at Mary and The dog barked
at the cat, but didn’t cover possible construc-
tions like Paul laughed at Mary to his friends or
The dog whimpered to its owner about the rab-
bit in the yard. Adding Stimulus and its usual
predicate in reaction to(e, Stimulus) to these rep-
resentations aligns them with the other Stimu-
lus/Experiencer classes and expands the range
of frames they cover. These classes reflect the
same assumptions about boundaries on possession
shown in (10).

(11) The dog whimpered to its owner at the sight
of the rabbit in the yard



161

Agent V Recipient Stimulus
has information(E, Agent, ?Theme)
¬has information(e1, Recipient, ?Theme)
transfer info(e2, Agent, ?Theme, Recipi-
ent)
manner(e2, Agent, V Manner)
in reaction to(e2, Stimulus)
has information(e3, Recipient, ?Theme)
cause(e2, e3)

5 Automatic VerbNet Parsing

To facilitate immediate use of the new VerbNet se-
mantic representations, we are releasing a seman-
tic parser that predicts the updated semantic rep-
resentations from events in natural language input
sentences. For a given predicative verb in a sen-
tence, we define VerbNet semantic parsing as the
task of identifying the VN class, associated the-
matic roles, and corresponding semantic represen-
tations linked to a frame within the class.

We approach VerbNet semantic parsing in three
distinct steps: 1. Sense disambiguation to iden-
tify the appropriate VN class, 2. PropBank se-
mantic role labeling (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002;
Palmer et al., 2005) to identify and classify argu-
ments, and 3. Alignment of PropBank semantic
roles with VN thematic roles within a frame be-
longing to the predicted VN class. After align-
ing arguments from the PropBank SRL system’s
output with the thematic roles in a particular VN
frame, the frame’s associated semantic predicates
can be instantiated using the aligned arguments.

For sense disambiguation, we use a supervised
verb sense classifier trained on updated VN class
tags (Palmer et al., 2017). For semantic role
labeling, we use a variation of the system de-
scribed in He et al. (2017) and Peters et al.
(2018) using solely ELMo embeddings (without
any pre-trained or fine-tuned word-specific vec-
tors) trained on a combination of three PropBank
annotated corpora described in (O’Gorman et al.,
2019): OntoNotes (Hovy et al., 2006), the En-
glish Web TreeBank (Bies et al., 2012), and the
BOLT corpus (Garland et al., 2012). For align-
ment, we begin by applying updated SemLink
mappings (Palmer, 2009) to map PropBank roles
to linked VN thematic roles for the identified VN
class. Remaining arguments are then mapped us-
ing heuristics based on the syntactic and selec-
tional restrictions defined in the VN class. To se-

lect among multiple valid frames, we select the
frame with highest total number of roles among
the VN frames with the fewest unmapped roles.

This approach to VN parsing using multiple in-
dependent systems represents a simple baseline
approach. We leave a more sophisticated, unified
approach to VN semantic parsing to future work.

6 Conclusion

The fine-grained semantic representations pre-
sented here improve the consistency and precision
of VerbNet’s verb semantics, offering a more use-
ful modeling for the subevent structure of partic-
ular event types. This should improve VerbNet’s
utility for human-robot and human-avatar interac-
tion, and lend enhanced richness to applications
aimed at temporal event sequencing.

All of the resources described in this paper
are freely available. An online, browsable
version of all the semantic representations
is available through the Unified Verb In-
dex at https://uvi.colorado.edu/uvi search.
A downloadable version can be accessed at
https://uvi.colorado.edu/nlp applications. A
demo of the VerbNet Parser is at http://verbnet-
semantic-parser.appspot.com/.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge the support of DTRAl
-16-1-0002/Project 1553695, eTASC - Empirical
Evidence for a Theoretical Approach to Seman-
tic Components and DARPA 15-18-CwC-FP-032
Communicating with Computers, C3 Cognitively
Coherent Human-Computer Communication (sub
from UIUC) and Elementary Composable Ideas
(ECI) Repository (sub from SIFT). Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of DTRA
or the U.S. government.

In addition, we thank our anonymous reviewers
for their constructive feedback.

References

Omri Abend, Roi Reichart, and Ari Rappoport. 2008.
A supervised algorithm for verb disambiguation into
verbnet classes. In Proceedings of the 22nd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics-
Volume 1, pages 9–16. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.



162

Norm Badler, Martha Palmer, and Rama Bindiganavle.
1999. Animation control for real-time virtual hu-
mans. Communications of the ACM, 42(7):65–73.

Ann Bies, Justin Mott, Colin Warner, and Seth Kulick.
2012. English web treebank. Linguistic Data Con-
sortium, Philadelphia, PA.

Claire Bonial, Susan Windisch Brown, William Cor-
vey, Martha Palmer, Volha Petukhova, and Harry
Bunt. 2011. An exploratory comparison of thematic
roles in verbnet and lirics. In Workshop on Interop-
erable Semantic Annotation, page 39.

Johan Bos. 2008. Wide-coverage semantic analysis
with boxer. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference
on Semantics in Text Processing, pages 277–286.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Susan Windisch Brown, Dmitriy Dligach, and Martha
Palmer. 2014. Verbnet class assignment as a wsd
task. In Computing Meaning, pages 203–216.
Springer.

Susan Windisch Brown and Martha Palmer. 2012. Se-
mantic annotation of metaphorical verbs with verb-
net: A case study of climband poison. In Workshop
on interoperable semantic annotation, page 72.

Susan Windisch Brown, James Pustejovsky, Annie Za-
enen, and Martha Palmer. 2018. Integrating gener-
ative lexicon event structures into verbnet. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eleventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2018).

Danilo Croce, Roberto Basili, Alessandro Moschitti,
and Martha Palmer. 2012. Verb classification us-
ing distributional similarity in syntactic and seman-
tic structures. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 263–272.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jennifer Garland, Stephanie Strassel, Safa Ismael,
Zhiyi Song, and Haejoong Lee. 2012. Linguistic
resources for genre-independent language technolo-
gies: user-generated content in bolt. In Workshop
Programme, page 34.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245–288.

Ana-Maria Giuglea and Alessandro Moschitti. 2006.
Semantic role labeling via framenet, verbnet and
propbank. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and the
44th annual meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 929–936. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Adele E Goldberg. 2006. Constructions at work: The
nature of generalization in language. Oxford Uni-
versity Press on Demand.

Luheng He, Kenton Lee, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2017. Deep Semantic Role Labeling: What
Works and What’s Next. Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).

Eduard Hovy, Mitchell Marcus, Martha Palmer, Lance
Ramshaw, and Ralph Weischedel. 2006. OntoNotes:
the 90% solution. In Proceedings of the human lan-
guage technology conference of the NAACL, Com-
panion Volume: Short Papers, pages 57–60. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Jena D Hwang. 2014. Identification and representation
of caused motion constructions.

Daisuke Kawahara and Martha Palmer. 2014. Sin-
gle classifier approach for verb sense disambigua-
tion based on generalized features. In LREC, pages
4210–4213.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2006. Extending verbnet with novel
verb classes. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 2006,
page 1. Citeseer.

Karin Kipper and Martha Palmer. 2000. Representa-
tion of actions as an interlingua. In Proceedings of
NAACL-ANLP Workshop on Applied Interlinguas:
practical applications of interlingual approaches to
NLP,, pages 12–17. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press.

Edward Loper, Szu-Ting Yi, and Martha Palmer. 2007.
Combining lexical resources: mapping between
propbank and verbnet. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Workshop on Computational Linguistics,
Tilburg, the Netherlands.

Anjali Narayan-Chen, Colin Graber, Mayukh Das,
Md Rakibul Islam, Soham Dan, Sriraam Natarajan,
Janardhan Rao Doppa, Julia Hockenmaier, Martha
Palmer, and Dan Roth. 2017. Towards problem
solving agents that communicate and learn. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Language
Grounding for Robotics, pages 95–103.

Tim O’Gorman, Sameer Pradhan, James Gung, and
Martha Palmer. 2019. The unified propbank land-
scape. Ms.

Martha Palmer. 2009. Semlink: Linking propbank,
verbnet and framenet. In Proceedings of the gen-
erative lexicon conference, pages 9–15. Pisa Italy.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1044
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1044
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1614064
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1614064


163

Martha Palmer, James Gung, Claire Bonial, Jinho
Choi, Orin Hargraves, Derek Palmer, and Kevin
Stowe. 2017. The Pitfalls of Shortcuts: Tales from
the word sense tagging trenches. Springer series
Text, Speech and Language Technology, Essays in
Lexical Semantics and Computational Lexicography
- In Honor of Adam Kilgarriff.

Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word rep-
resentations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages
2227–2237.

J. Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. Brad-
ford Book. Mit Press.

James Pustejovsky. 2013. Dynamic event structure and
habitat theory. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Conference on Generative Approaches to the
Lexicon (GL2013), pages 1–10. ACL.

James Pustejovsky and Jessica Moszkowicz. 2011.
The qualitative spatial dynamics of motion. The
Journal of Spatial Cognition and Computation.

James Pustejovsky, Martha Palmer, Annie Zaenen, and
Susan Brown. 2016. Verb meaning in context: In-
tegrating verbnet and gl predicative structures. In
Proceedings of the LREC 2016 Workshop: ISA-12,
Potoroz, Slovenia, volume 2016.

J. Allbeck N. Badler A. Joshi R. Bindiganavale,
W. Schuler and M. Palmer. 2000. Dynami-
cally, altering agent behaviors using natural lan-
guage instructions. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents
(AGENTS), pages 293–300.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2005. Verbnet: A broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon.

Lei Shi and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Putting pieces to-
gether: Combining framenet, verbnet and wordnet
for robust semantic parsing. In International con-
ference on intelligent text processing and computa-
tional linguistics, pages 100–111. Springer.

Annie Zaenen, Daniel G Bobrow, and Cleo Condo-
ravdi. 2008. The encoding of lexical implications in
verbnet predicates of change of locations. In LREC.


