



















































Linguistic Analysis of Schizophrenia in Reddit Posts


Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology, pages 74–83
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 6, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

74

Linguistic Analysis of Schizophrenia in Reddit Posts

Jonathan Zomick
Psychology Department

Hofstra University
Hempstead, NY 11549

jzomick1@pride.hofstra.edu

Sarah Ita Levitan
Computer Science Department

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

sarahita@cs.columbia.edu

Mark Serper
Psychology Department

Hofstra University
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
mark.r.serper@hofstra.edu

Abstract

We explore linguistic indicators of schizophre-
nia in Reddit discussion forums. Schizophre-
nia (SZ) is a chronic mental disorder that af-
fects a person’s thoughts and behaviors. Iden-
tifying and detecting signs of SZ is difficult
given that SZ is relatively uncommon, affect-
ing approximately 1% of the US population,
and people suffering with SZ often believe that
they do not have the disorder. Linguistic ab-
normalities are a hallmark of SZ and many of
the illness’s symptoms are manifested through
language. In this paper we leverage the vast
amount of data available from social media
and use statistical and machine learning ap-
proaches to study linguistic characteristics of
SZ. We collected and analyzed a large corpus
of Reddit posts from users claiming to have
received a formal diagnosis of SZ and iden-
tified several linguistic features that differenti-
ated these users from a control (CTL) group.
We compared these results to other findings
on social media linguistic analysis and SZ. We
also developed a machine learning classifier
to automatically identify self-identified users
with SZ on Reddit.

1 Introduction

Schizophrenia is a serious mental illness that af-
fects roughly 1% of the US population (NIMH,
2019) and is reportedly one of the 25 top causes
of disability around the world (Vos et al., 2015).
Symptoms of the disorder are categorized as posi-
tive symptoms (e.g., delusions, hallucinations, dis-
organized thinking) or negative symptoms (e.g.,
diminished emotional expression, anhedonia, aso-
ciality) (APA, 2013). Individuals with SZ are
at an elevated risk for suicide; an estimated 4-
5% of people diagnosed with SZ die from sui-
cide (Hor and Taylor, 2010; Carlborg et al., 2010).
Early detection and diagnosis of the disorder has
been speculated to improve long-term outcomes

for people suffering with SZ (Birchwood et al.,
1997). However, early detection and diagnosis of
SZ is challenging given that it is a relatively un-
common disease and diagnostic measures are re-
liant on self-report measures. Additionally, many
people suffering from the disorder genuinely do
not believe they have SZ (Rickelman, 2004).

Linguistic abnormalities are prominent symp-
toms of SZ (APA, 2013). Some of the linguistic
markers associated with people with the illness in-
clude diminished emotional expression, incoher-
ence, derailment, tangentiality, co-reference fail-
ure and lexical and syntactical errors (Rochester
and Martin, 1979; Harvey and Serper, 1990;
Hoekert et al., 2007; Covington et al., 2005; Ku-
perberg, 2010). Much of the research on language
and SZ has focused on analyzing transcriptions of
spoken language and handwritten samples, which
tend to be small, manually collected datasets.

Some recent research has focused on analyz-
ing language from social media posts (Birnbaum
et al., 2017; Lyons et al., 2018; Coppersmith et al.,
2015; Mitchell et al., 2015). With the advent of
social media, many people who suffer from vari-
ous forms of mental illness have found a sense of
community and support, and these platforms offer
a mode of expression for discussing their experi-
ences openly online. Additionally, many online
platforms allow users to post anonymously, giving
users a sense of security and anonymity to discuss
their experiences and struggles without the fear of
being stigmatized or discriminated against (Bal-
ani and De Choudhury, 2015; Berry et al., 2017;
Highton-Williamson et al., 2015).

There are many advantages to leveraging so-
cial media data for analyzing the linguistic char-
acteristics of SZ. This open discussion enables the
collection and annotation of social media posts
of relatively uncommon disorders such as SZ.
These corpora can be collected using automated or



75

semi-automated methods, and enable analysis on
a much larger scale. Regular social media use has
risen above two billion users worldwide (Kemp,
2014), and youth comprise the largest and fastest
growing demographic of social media users – over
90% of youth in the US reportedly engage in so-
cial media on a daily basis (Lenhart et al., 2015).
Studying SZ among social media users can be
useful for identifying early stages of the disorder,
which is critical for early intervention.

Most of the research on social media posts
and SZ has focused on Twitter data. In this pa-
per we explore another popular social media plat-
form: Reddit. Reddit is one of the fastest grow-
ing and widely used social media platforms, aver-
aging over 330 million active monthly users, and
as of 2018 was the fourth most visited website in
the US (Hutchinson, 2018). Unlike Twitter, Red-
dit imposes no limits on the length of posts, en-
abling an analysis of longer language samples. In
addition, Reddit is composed of subreddits, which
are forums dedicated to specific topics. We lever-
age subreddits that are communities for individu-
als with SZ for identifying potential Reddit users
with SZ, in order to collect a corpus of posts from
these users (as described in Section 3).

These online posts provide a rich source of lan-
guage data which we use to identify linguistic
markers of SZ. We also use this data to train a ma-
chine learning classifier to automatically identify
individuals with SZ using linguistic cues. Hope-
fully, an improved understanding of linguistic pat-
terns unique to this population can assist in diag-
nostic procedures and be employed as an early de-
tection mechanism.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 reviews relevant previous research, and
3 describes the dataset that we collected and the
features that we use for analysis. In Section 4, we
present the analysis of linguistic markers of SZ,
and provide a detailed comparison of our findings
with prior work. Section 5 presents the results of
our machine learning classification of users with
SZ. We discuss ethical considerations in Section 6
and conclude in Section 7.

2 Related Work

Some recent research has analyzed Twitter data
of self-identified individuals with SZ with promis-
ing results. Mitchell et al. (2015) analyzed a va-
riety of linguistic markers of SZ using tweets of

self-identified individuals with SZ. Their features
included lexicon-based and open-vocabulary ap-
proaches, and they discovered several significant
signals for SZ. Further, they trained classifiers us-
ing these features and obtained an accuracy of
82%.

Coppersmith et al. (2015) used a similar ap-
proach to study 10 mental disorders, including SZ,
and identified linguistic markers of each. They
also leveraged the collected data to explore rela-
tionships between linguistic markers of multiple
conditions, which is very difficult to analyze with-
out a large-scale corpus. Birnbaum et al. (2017)
also analyzed linguistic markers of SZ in Twitter
data, and built a classifier to distinguish users with
SZ from healthy controls. Importantly, they ob-
tained clinician annotations of the data to validate
the approach of annotating social media data based
on self-disclosure of mental health conditions.

A limitation of analyzing Twitter data is that
posts are constrained in character length so only
very short samples of text are available for anal-
ysis. Furthermore, the character restrictions im-
posed by Twitter may affect users’ linguistic ex-
pression and force users to communicate in ways
that differ from their natural way of communicat-
ing. An alternative source of social media data
are discussion board forums. Discussion board fo-
rums are not character-limited, and allow for fo-
cused conversations on topics within sub-forums.
Lyons et al. (2018) analyzed several discussion
board forums dedicated to mental disorders, in-
cluding Reddit, and used posts from a financial
discussion forum as a control. They studied lin-
guistic features related to affective processes and
personal pronoun usages, and found that these
were effective at distinguishing between individ-
uals with SZ and the control. In our work, we ex-
pand on this study by analyzing a larger set of lin-
guistic features. We also collected a control group
within the same platform to eliminate confound-
ing factors such as stylistic and topical differences
between discussion board forums.

Because all of these studies used overlapping
feature sets, and in particular Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count (LIWC) features (Pennebaker
et al., 2015b) (described in section 3), we had the
opportunity to analyze markers of SZ across do-
mains. We compare the results from our study
of Reddit data with previously identified markers
of SZ in the four studies described in this section.



76

This analysis allows us to identify some linguistic
characteristics of SZ that are domain-independent,
and identify differences in markers of SZ across
domains.

This work aims to build on the previous stud-
ies that have looked at SZ langauge on social me-
dia platforms. Specifially, to our knowledge we
present the first complete analysis of LIWC fea-
tures using Reddit data and compare these results
with the previous findings of LIWC features of SZ
on social media. Additionally, we analyze all Red-
dit posts of Reddit users claiming to have received
a SZ diagnosis, not just those in forums devoted
to discussions of SZ, and compare them to a con-
trol group of other Reddit users. We also train a
machine learning classifier to automatically iden-
tify individuals with SZ, which has not been pre-
viously explored using Reddit data. This research
will add to the current body of knowledge of lin-
guistic characteristics of individuals with SZ and
will hopefully help improve diagnoses and bolster
early detection of the disorder.

3 Data

3.1 Reddit Corpus

We used the Python Reddit API Wrapper (PRAW)
(Boe, 2016) to collect a corpus of Reddit posts
from users who stated that they were diagnosed
with SZ and a control group of users. We
first compiled a list of users with self-disclosures
of SZ by visiting subreddits devoted to discus-
sions about SZ. These included: r/schizophrenia,
r/schizophrenic, and r/AskReddit under the topic
“Any Redditors With Schizophrenia?”. We man-
ually inspected the posts to only include contrib-
utors with a clear statement of receiving a formal
diagnosis of SZ. For example, a user who referred
to “my diagnosis of schizophrenia” would be in-
cluded in the SZ group.

We also collected a random control group of
Reddit users, using the r/random subreddit, which
takes you to a random subreddit. To ensure a
control sample that is more representative of the
overall population, every five usernames that were
selected came from a different random subreddit.
We collected all public Reddit posts from the SZ
and CTL users across all subreddits, and removed
any users from the CTL group who mentioned suf-
fering from SZ in any of their posts. We collected
data from a total of 159 users for each group (318
total) who had posted at least 10 times on Reddit.

Users in the SZ group made a total of 66,454 com-
ments, and there were 113,570 comments from the
CTL users.

We note that this data is not representative of
the general population. For example, Reddit users
have been found to be predominantly male and
young (under 30) (Finlay, 2014). Our findings
are limited to this population, and further research
is needed to study the effects of gender and age
on linguistic markers of SZ. Another limitation of
using anonymous social media data for this work
is that it is not externally validated; although the
users in the SZ group stated that they were diag-
nosed with SZ, and the CTL users did not, we do
not have clinical information to verify this.

3.2 LIWC Features
Having collected this dataset, we analyzed linguis-
tic markers of SZ using Linguistic Inquiry and
Word Count (Pennebaker et al., 2015b). LIWC
is a text analysis program that computes word
counts for semantic classes as well as structural
features. LIWC relies on an internal dictionary
that maps words to psychologically motivated cat-
egories. When analyzing a target text, the program
looks up the target words in the dictionary and
computes frequencies for each of the dimensions.
The categories include standard linguistic dimen-
sions (e.g., percentage of words that are pronouns,
articles), markers of psychological processes (e.g.,
affect, social, cognitive words), punctuation cate-
gories (e.g., periods, commas), and formality mea-
sures (e.g., fillers, swear words). LIWC dimen-
sions have been used in many studies to predict
outcomes including personality (Pennebaker and
King, 1999), deception (Newman et al., 2003), and
health (Pennebaker et al., 1997). We extracted a
total of 93 features using LIWC 2015. A full de-
scription of these features is found in (Pennebaker
et al., 2015a).

We selected LIWC to analyze linguistic mark-
ers of SZ because these features have been widely
studied for this purpose in other domains (such as
Twitter), which enables a direct comparison of re-
sults across domains.



77

Category Reddit Discussion
Forums

Twitter

Paper Current Lyons et. al (A) (B) (C)
Linguistic Processes
Word count SZ
Dictionary words SZ
Total function words SZ SZ SZ
Total pronouns SZ SZ
Personal pronouns SZ SZ SZ
1st person singular SZ SZ SZ SZ
1st person plural CTL CTL SZ
2nd person SZ SZ
3rd person singular CTL SZ SZ
3rd person plural SZ SZ SZ SZ
Impersonal pronouns SZ SZ
Articles CTL SZ SZ SZ
Auxiliary verbs SZ SZ SZ SZ
Common adverbs SZ
Conjunctions SZ SZ SZ
Negations CTL SZ
Other Grammar
Common verbs SZ
Numbers CTL
Quantifiers SZ SZ
Psychological processes
Affective processes SZ SZ
Positive emotion SZ CTL CTL SZ
Negative emotion SZ SZ SZ
Anxiety SZ SZ SZ
Anger CTL SZ
Sadness SZ SZ
Social processes SZ
Friends CTL
Male references CTL
Cognitive processes SZ SZ SZ SZ
Insight SZ SZ SZ SZ
Causation SZ SZ
Discrepancy SZ SZ
Tentatitve SZ SZ SZ SZ
Certainty SZ
Perceptual processes SZ SZ
See CTL CTL
Hear SZ SZ
Feel SZ SZ
Biological Processes SZ SZ
Body SZ
Health SZ SZ SZ SZ
Sexual SZ
Drives SZ
Achievement SZ
Power CTL



78

Reward SZ
Time orientations SZ SZ
Past focus SZ SZ
Present focus SZ SZ
Future focus CTL
Relativity CTL CTL CTL
Motion CTL CTL
Space CTL SZ
Personal concerns
Work SZ
Leisure CTL CTL CTL
Home CTL CTL SZ
Money CTL
Death SZ SZ
Informal language
Swear words CTL SZ
Assent CTL CTL
Punctuation
Question marks CTL
Exclamation marks SZ SZ
Dashes CTL
Other punctuation CTL

Table 1: LIWC features that were significantly different between SZ and CTL groups, compared across five
studies. “Current” indicates the analysis of Reddit posts conducted in this paper, Lyons et al. (2018) studied some
LIWC variables in discussion board posts (including Reddit). The three studies that examined Twitter data are:
(A) Mitchell et al. (2015); (B): Coppersmith et al. (2015) ; and (C): Birnbaum et al. (2017). Gray cells indicate
categories that were not examined in a study (some are due to differences between LIWC 2015 and 2007 versions).



79

4 Linguistic Characteristics of SZ and
CTL Reddit Comments

To identify linguistic markers of SZ, we compared
the frequencies of each LIWC dimension in SZ
and CTL users. We averaged the frequencies of
the LIWC dimensions across all posts per user so
that each user was represented once in the dataset.
This was done to avoid skewing the data based on
a few users who posted a large number of com-
ments. We used an independent samples t-test
to determine whether the difference in mean fre-
quency for each LIWC feature between the SZ and
CTL groups was statistically significant. All tests
for significance correct for family-wise Type I er-
ror by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) at
α = 0.05 (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). The
kth smallest p value is considered significant if it
is less than k∗αn . Table 1 shows the results of this
analysis in the “Reddit” column. “SZ” indicates
that the feature was significantly more frequent
in posts from users with SZ, and “CTL” indicates
that the feature was significantly more frequent in
posts from the control group of users.

We found significant differences between the
SZ group and the CTL group for many of the
LIWC features. These differences spanned var-
ious linguistic domains including linguistic pro-
cesses, grammar, psychological processes, and
punctuation. In addition to showing the results
of our analysis of Reddit posts, Table 1 shows a
comparison of our results with four other studies
that examined LIWC features and SZ in social me-
dia data: one study (Lyons et al., 2018) used data
from Reddit and other online discussion forums
(but only examined personal pronouns and affec-
tive processes), and 3 studies examined Twitter
data: (A) Mitchell et al. (2015), (B) Coppersmith
et al. (2015), and (C) Birnbaum et al. (2017).

Many of our findings were in line with previous
research on other social media platforms, while
some of the markers that we identified differed
from previous studies. We identified several mark-
ers of SZ in our Reddit corpus that have not been
previously noted. These include an increased as-
sociation between users with SZ and the follow-
ing features: Word count, Dictionary words, Com-
mon adverbs, Verbs, Reward, and Drives. Addi-
tionally, unlike previous social media studies, we
found diminished expression among the following
features: 3rd person singular, Articles, Negations,
Anger, Male references, Power, Money, Swear

words, Question marks, Dashes, and Other punc-
tuation. It is not surprising that there are discrep-
ancies between this study and others. This type
of analysis has not been previously conducted on
data taken exclusively from Reddit, and the major-
ity of these features were not analyzed in the dis-
cussion forum data by (Lyons et al., 2018). There
is a substantial domain mismatch between Red-
dit and Twitter data, and markers of SZ that have
been observed in Twitter data may not general-
ize to other domains, while other markers that we
have observed in the Reddit may not have been
observed in previous work with Twitter data due
to the character constraints that platform places on
users’ posts.

On the other hand, some of the findings regard-
ing association between specific LIWC features
and SZ are more robust and have been replicated
in multiple studies. When comparing results from
the five studies that looked at SZ language and so-
cial media, at least 3 out of the 5 studies reported
increased frequency among users with SZ in the
following features: Total function words, Personal
Pronouns, 1st person pronouns, 3rd person plural,
Articles, Auxiliary verbs, Conjunctions, Negative
emotion, Anxiety, Cognitive processes, Insight,
Tentative, and Health. Other findings that have
been replicated multiple times relate to diminished
expression of certain LIWC features among users
with SZ in comparison with control users. Three
of the five studies found that users with SZ used
words associated with the features Relativity and
Leisure significantly less than control groups.

4.1 Discussion

The present results are consistent with past studies
that have found that users with SZ use words as-
sociated with health issues, anxiety, negative emo-
tion and use of 1st person singular pronouns more
than control groups. An emphasis on health re-
lated matters, expressions of negative emotions,
and a focus on one’s self are understandable for
people suffering from a serious mental illness. It
is also somewhat understandable that users with
SZ use leisure related words significantly less than
controls, since individuals suffering from mental
illness appear to be less focused or interested in
leisure activities (Thornicroft et al., 2004). How-
ever, some of the linguistic features that have been
found elevated among users with SZ in multiple
studies are not as intuitive, such as usage of 3rd



80

person plural pronouns, Insight words, and Tenta-
tive words.

The robust findings of usage of 3rd person plu-
ral pronouns may be related to SZ symptomatol-
ogy. For example, relative excessive use of pro-
nouns such as “they” and “them” may reflect a
disaffiliativeness from others that is reflected in
symptoms of social anhedonia. Further support for
this line of reasoning comes from our finding and
findings by Lyons et al. (2018) that members of
the SZ group used 1st person plural pronouns such
as “we” and “us” less than the CTL group, which
may also be an indication of social disaffiliation
and withdrawal.

Additionally, the use of 3rd person plural pro-
nouns may reflect positive symptoms common to
the disorder (Bentall et al., 2001; APA, 2013). Pre-
vious researchers have posited that the increased
usage of 3rd person plural pronouns among SZ pa-
tients may be a reflection of an externalizing bias,
paranoid thinking, and a focus on outside groups
(Fineberg et al., 2015; Lyons et al., 2018). The de-
creased usage of 1st person plural pronouns may
also reflect social withdrawal due to paranoid sus-
picions that result in social anxiety and subsequent
isolation.

All of the studies reported here that looked at
tentative language in social media data and SZ
found that users with SZ used tentative words like
“perhaps” and “maybe” significantly more than
CTL users. Tausczik and Pennebaker (2010) sug-
gest that tentative language is suggestive of dif-
ficulty processing events and forming events into
stories and may indicate uncertainty or insecurity
about a topic. Use of tentative language may be
a manifestation of an impaired sense of agency
and diminished self-presence reportedly associ-
ated with people with SZ (Jeannerod, 2009; Sass
and Parnas, 2003). The increased usage of 1st per-
son pronouns may also be a marker of a hyper-
reflexivity (exaggerated self-consciousness) expe-
rienced by individuals with SZ, as described by
Sass and Parnas (2003).

In contrast to earlier social media data we found
that the SZ group used punctuation significantly
less frequently than the CTL group. The discrep-
ancy between this work and previous work using
Twitter data may be due to differences between
these two platforms. The character restrictions
Twitter places on posts may discourage usage of
proper punctuation to preserve space for content

words. However, Reddit posts that do not have
these restrictions may reflect more natural lan-
guage of users and allow for additional observa-
tions such as differences in punctuation usage. In
line with the hypothesis put forth by Fineberg et al.
(2015) our finding that users with SZ use punc-
tuation significantly less than CTL users may re-
flect more disorganized use of language, a promi-
nent symptom of schizophrenia (Covington et al.,
2005; APA, 2013).

5 Automatic Identification of Users with
Schizophrenia

Having identified many differences in language
usage between Reddit users with SZ and the con-
trol group, we trained a machine learning classifier
to automatically distinguish between the groups,
using the LIWC features. We used the scikit-learn
(Pedregosa et al., 2011) implementation of a Lo-
gistic Regression model using the default param-
eters. The model was trained and evaluated using
stratified 5-fold cross-validation. We averaged the
LIWC features across all comments per user and
trained the model to determine whether the aggre-
gated LIWC features were from the posts of a user
from the SZ group or the CTL group. The random
baseline is 50%, since the data is balanced across
groups.

The average performance of the classifier across
5 folds was 81.56% accuracy, and the standard de-
viation was 2.29. The top 10 LIWC dimensions
for the SZ and CTL classes, obtained from the lo-
gistic regression coefficients, are shown in Table
2. Some of these weighted features were consis-
tent with our statistical analysis of LIWC features.
For example, the Health category was highly pre-
dictive of SZ, as was the Tentative dimension. In-
tuitively, Sadness was the strongest (negative) pre-
dictor of the control group, and 3rd person singular
was also a useful (negative) predictor of the con-
trol group.

These findings suggest that linguistic features
are useful for automatically identifying social me-
dia users with self-described SZ on a large, pub-
lic, anonymous social media site. The classifier
achieved strong performance, 31.56% better than
a random baseline. However, although a balanced
data set is useful for analyzing linguistic indica-
tors of SZ and for evaluating the machine learn-
ing classification results, we note (as do Mitchell
et al. (2015)) that this setup is not representative of



81

Control (CTL) Schizophrenia (SZ)
Weight Feature Weight Feature
-1.2748 Sadness 1.6105 Health
-1.1109 Quotation mark 1.0717 Interrogatives
-0.8715 3rd person singular 1.0614 Tentative
-0.7956 Feel 0.9825 Hear
-0.7949 Articles 0.9426 Colon
-0.7302 Nonfluencies 0.9304 Death
-0.6705 Adjectives 0.8021 Biological processes
-0.6329 See 0.7642 1st person singular
-0.6214 Motion 0.6975 Parentheses
-0.6182 Present focus 0.6478 Verbs

Table 2: Top weighted features from the logistic regression classifier for the SZ and CTL groups.

the true distribution of SZ and healthy individuals
(only 1% have SZ).

6 Ethical Considerations

Detecting mental health conditions using linguis-
tic features extracted from social media has the po-
tential to enhance detection of disorders for early
intervention and improve outcomes for individuals
suffering from mental illness. However, there are
several important ethical concerns with this line
of research, and necessary precautions must be
taken. First, is the issue of informed consent. Al-
though social media posts are publicly available,
users are typically unaware of the research being
conducted and do not explicitly provide consent
for their data to be mined for sensitive informa-
tion. Additionally, individuals with mental illness,
and especially young individuals, are a sensitive,
at risk population and extra caution must be taken
when collecting and analyzing their data to ensure
they remain anonymous and unidentifiable.

Submitting to IRB review and obtaining IRB
approval or exemption for any study with this pop-
ulation is critical. Extreme caution must be taken
to protect this sensitive data, and collected corpora
should not be shared without IRB approval. Fur-
ther, if data is shared with specific parties, the data
should be anonymized so that identifying informa-
tion is not disclosed. As data mining for mental
health research becomes more popular and preva-
lent, it is important to be aware of these ethical
considerations and to take the necessary precau-
tions to protect the studied population. For further
guidance in this area, Benton et al. (2017) have
compiled an excellent review of ethical considera-
tions for social media health research.

7 Conclusion

We collected a corpus of Reddit users claiming to
have received a diagnosis of SZ and used natural
language processing and statistical techniques to
analyze and compare language from their posts
and those of a control group comprised of ran-
dom Reddit users. We identified several linguistic
markers of SZ, and compared these findings with
previous research on linguistic markers of SZ us-
ing data from other social media platforms. This
work is useful for identifying markers of SZ that
are robust across domains. Finally, we trained
a machine learning classifier that identified self-
described SZ sufferers on Reddit with over 80%
accuracy, using linguistic features. These findings
contribute toward the ultimate goal of identifying
high risk individuals and providing early interven-
tion to improve overall treatment outcomes.

References
APA. 2013. Diagnostic and statistical manual of men-

tal disorders (DSM-5 R©). American Psychiatric
Pub.

Sairam Balani and Munmun De Choudhury. 2015. De-
tecting and characterizing mental health related self-
disclosure in social media. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
1373–1378. ACM.

Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. Control-
ling the false discovery rate: a practical and pow-
erful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the
Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological),
57(1):289–300.

Richard P Bentall, Rhiannon Corcoran, Robert
Howard, Nigel Blackwood, and Peter Kinderman.



82

2001. Persecutory delusions: a review and the-
oretical integration. Clinical psychology review,
21(8):1143–1192.

Adrian Benton, Glen Coppersmith, and Mark Dredze.
2017. Ethical research protocols for social media
health research. In Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 94–102.

Natalie Berry, Fiona Lobban, Maksim Belousov,
Richard Emsley, Goran Nenadic, and Sandra Bucci.
2017. # whywetweetmh: understanding why people
use twitter to discuss mental health problems. Jour-
nal of medical Internet research, 19(4).

Max Birchwood, Patrick McGorry, and Henry Jack-
son. 1997. Early intervention in schizophrenia. The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 170(1):2–5.

Michael L Birnbaum, Sindhu Kiranmai Ernala, Asra F
Rizvi, Munmun De Choudhury, and John M Kane.
2017. A collaborative approach to identifying so-
cial media markers of schizophrenia by employing
machine learning and clinical appraisals. Journal of
medical Internet research, 19(8).

Bryce Boe. 2016. Python Reddit API Wrapper
(PRAW). https://praw.readthedocs.io/
en/v6.1.1/. Accessed: 2019-03-10.

Andreas Carlborg, Kajsa Winnerbäck, Erik G Jönsson,
Jussi Jokinen, and Peter Nordström. 2010. Suicide
in schizophrenia. Expert review of neurotherapeu-
tics, 10(7):1153–1164.

Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, Craig Harman, and
Kristy Hollingshead. 2015. From adhd to sad: An-
alyzing the language of mental health on twitter
through self-reported diagnoses. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Linguistics
and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to
Clinical Reality, pages 1–10.

Michael A Covington, Congzhou He, Cati Brown,
Lorina Naçi, Jonathan T McClain, Bess Sirmon
Fjordbak, James Semple, and John Brown. 2005.
Schizophrenia and the structure of language: the lin-
guist’s view. Schizophrenia research, 77(1):85–98.

SK Fineberg, S Deutsch-Link, M Ichinose, T McGuin-
ness, AJ Bessette, CK Chung, and PR Corlett. 2015.
Word use in first-person accounts of schizophrenia.
The British Journal of Psychiatry, 206(1):32–38.

S Craig Finlay. 2014. Age and gender in Reddit com-
menting and success. Journal of Information Sci-
ence Theory and Practice, pages 18–28.

Philip D Harvey and Mark R Serper. 1990. Linguis-
tic and cognitive failures in schizophrenia: A mul-
tivariate analysis. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease.

Elizabeth Highton-Williamson, Stefan Priebe, and
Domenico Giacco. 2015. Online social networking
in people with psychosis: a systematic review. In-
ternational Journal of Social Psychiatry, 61(1):92–
101.

Marjolijn Hoekert, René S Kahn, Marieke Pijnenborg,
and André Aleman. 2007. Impaired recognition and
expression of emotional prosody in schizophrenia:
review and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia research,
96(1-3):135–145.

Kahyee Hor and Mark Taylor. 2010. Suicide and
schizophrenia: a systematic review of rates and
risk factors. Journal of psychopharmacology,
24(4 suppl):81–90.

Andrew Hutchinson. 2018. Reddit now has as many
users as twitter, and far higher engagement rates.
https://www.socialmediatoday.com/
news/reddit-now-has-as-many-
users-as-twitter-and-far-higher-
engagement-rates/521789/. Accessed:
2019-03-10.

Marc Jeannerod. 2009. The sense of agency and its
disturbances in schizophrenia: a reappraisal. Exper-
imental Brain Research, 192(3):527.

Simon Kemp. 2014. Social, digital & mobile in 2014.
We Are Social Singapore, 28.

Gina R Kuperberg. 2010. Language in schizophrenia
part 1: an introduction. Language and linguistics
compass, 4(8):576–589.

Amanda Lenhart, Maeve Duggan, Andrew Perrin, Re-
nee Stepler, Harrison Rainie, Kim Parker, et al.
2015. Teens, social media & technology overview
2015. Pew Research Center [Internet & American
Life Project].

Minna Lyons, Nazli Deniz Aksayli, and Gayle Brewer.
2018. Mental distress and language use: Linguistic
analysis of discussion forum posts. Computers in
Human Behavior, 87:207–211.

Margaret Mitchell, Kristy Hollingshead, and Glen
Coppersmith. 2015. Quantifying the language of
schizophrenia in social media. In Proceedings of
the 2nd workshop on Computational linguistics and
clinical psychology: From linguistic signal to clini-
cal reality, pages 11–20.

Matthew L Newman, James W Pennebaker, Diane S
Berry, and Jane M Richards. 2003. Lying words:
Predicting deception from linguistic styles. Person-
ality and social psychology bulletin, 29(5):665–675.

NIMH. 2019. Schizophrenia. https:
//www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
schizophrenia/index.shtml. Accessed:
2019-03-10.

https://praw.readthedocs.io/en/v6.1.1/
https://praw.readthedocs.io/en/v6.1.1/
https://www.socialmediatoday.com/news/reddit-now-has-as-many-users-as-twitter-and-far-higher-engagement-rates/521789/
https://www.socialmediatoday.com/news/reddit-now-has-as-many-users-as-twitter-and-far-higher-engagement-rates/521789/
https://www.socialmediatoday.com/news/reddit-now-has-as-many-users-as-twitter-and-far-higher-engagement-rates/521789/
https://www.socialmediatoday.com/news/reddit-now-has-as-many-users-as-twitter-and-far-higher-engagement-rates/521789/
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/schizophrenia/index.shtml
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/schizophrenia/index.shtml
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/schizophrenia/index.shtml


83

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. 2011. Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in python. Journal of machine
learning research, 12(Oct):2825–2830.

James W Pennebaker, Ryan L Boyd, Kayla Jordan, and
Kate Blackburn. 2015a. The development and psy-
chometric properties of liwc2015. Technical report.

James W Pennebaker and Laura A King. 1999. Lin-
guistic styles: language use as an individual differ-
ence. Journal of personality and social psychology,
77(6):1296.

James W Pennebaker, Tracy J Mayne, and Martha E
Francis. 1997. Linguistic predictors of adaptive be-
reavement. Journal of personality and social psy-
chology, 72(4):863.

JW Pennebaker, CK Chung, M Ireland, A Gonzales,
and RJ Booth. 2015b. Liwc. Austin, Texas; 2007.
LIWC2007: Linguistic inquiry and word count [soft-
ware program for text analysis] URL: http://liwc.
wpengine. com/[accessed 2017-02-27].

Bonnie L Rickelman. 2004. Anosognosia in individu-
als with schizophrenia: toward recovery of insight.
Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 25(3):227–242.

S Rochester and JR Martin. 1979. Jr, 1979 crazy talk:
A study of the discourse of schizophrenic speakers.

Louis A Sass and Josef Parnas. 2003. Schizophrenia,
consciousness, and the self. Schizophrenia bulletin,
29(3):427–444.

Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: Liwc and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of language
and social psychology, 29(1):24–54.

Graham Thornicroft, Michele Tansella, Thomas
Becker, Martin Knapp, Morven Leese, Aart Sch-
ene, José Luis Vazquez-Barquero, EPSILON Study
Group, et al. 2004. The personal impact of
schizophrenia in europe. Schizophrenia research,
69(2-3):125–132.

Theo Vos, Ryan M Barber, Brad Bell, Amelia Bertozzi-
Villa, Stan Biryukov, Ian Bolliger, Fiona Charlson,
Adrian Davis, Louisa Degenhardt, Daniel Dicker,
et al. 2015. Global, regional, and national inci-
dence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for
301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188
countries, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the
global burden of disease study 2013. The Lancet,
386(9995):743–800.


