












































 

 

 

Abstract 

Computer stylometry is the computer 

analysis of writing style. We use the 

computer stylometric techniques of 

Hierarchical Cluster Analysis, Principal 

Component Analysis and Machine 

Learning to examine the authorship of 

“The Liberation of Women” which is 

normally attributed to Qassim Amin. In 

particular we examine the assertion by 

Mohamed Emara that certain chapters of 

this book were written secretly by 

Mohammad Abdu, who was the Grand 

Mufti of Egypt. In our experiments, we 

consistently find that Qassim Amin is the 

more likely author of the disputed text. 

The experiments described in this paper 

were done using the “Stylometry in R” 

package of Eder et al. (2016).     

1 Introduction 

Women’s liberation was started in Egypt in the 

nineteenth century when Egypt was ruled by 

Mohammed Ali (1769-1849), and at that time the 

first school for training women was established. 

The school was used to train women to become 

medical assistants. Later Mohammed Ali opened 

the first primary school for girls. Ali sent many 

students to France to study there and to become 

leaders in different positions in the government. 

One of the students who was sent to France to do 

a Ph.D. degree was Qassim Amin. Qassim Amin 

finished his degree in law and traveled to France 

to stay there for about four years. Amin’s 

traditional view of society was altered, and he 

started to see Egyptian women’s lives through 

different eyes. He started to believe that life in the 

Egyptian community would not be improved 

unless the status of the women in society could 

improve. He believed that the main reason for 

their inferior position in the Egyptian community 

was ignorance about women and the lack of 

education. Accordingly, in 1899 he introduced his 

book “The Liberation of Women” (Amin, 2000) 

and used both rational Islamic arguments and 

emotional arguments to put forward his view. In 

his book, Amin called for women’s education, 

removing the veil, and reformation of marriage 

and divorce laws. Mohamed Emara who was born 

in December 1931 is an Islamic scholar, author, 

investigator, and member of the Islamic Research 

Academy at Al-Azhar, Cairo. He did his Master’s 

degree in Islamic philosophy at the Faculty of 

Science at Cairo University. He also got his Ph.D. 

from the same University in 1975. Mohamed 

Emara published many books about the life of 

many Islamic scholars including Jamal al-Deen 

al-Afghani, Abdul Razzaq Sanhouri Pasha, Sheikh 

Mohammed al-Ghazali, Rashid Rida and 

Muhammad Abdu. Emara stated in his book 

“Islam and Women in Mohammed Abdu’s 

opinion” (Emara, 1997) that many chapters of 

Qassim Amin’s book “Liberation of Women” 

were written secretly by Mohammed Abdu (1849-

1905) who was a teacher of Qassim Amin and a 

religious scholar, jurist, and liberal reformer. In 

this paper we used techniques of computer 

stylometry to examine whether it is more likely 

Computer Stylometric Comparison of Writings by 

 Qassim Amin and Mohammed Abdu on Women’s Rights 
 

 

 

 

 

Ahmed Ibrahim Ahmed Omer and Michael P. Oakes 

Research Institute of Language and Information Processing 

University of Wolverhampton 

Wolverhampton, England 

a.omer@wlv.ac.uk 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

that Mohammed Abdu wrote these chapters 

secretly or they were indeed written by Qassim 

Amin as generally thought.  

2 Related Work 

Discriminating between different authors is a 

challenging task, especially when there is a 

dispute about a text, and two or more authors have 

claimed that they have written this disputed text. 

Many studies in this field have tried to analyse the 

texts to find proof of authorship, and different 

approaches are used by researchers in the domain 

to find this evidence. A typical approach is finding 

the frequency of specific patterns appearing in the 

author’s texts. These can be, for example, the 

frequency of words, the word lengths, or the 

sentence lengths. Shaker and Corne (2010) used a 

set of 104 function words to analyze texts derived 

from samples extracted from the website of the 

Arab Writers’ Union (www.amu-dam.net). Their 

work was mainly inspired by Mosteller and 

Wallace’s (1964) typology of English function 

words. By shifting their focus to function words, 

they were able to effectively capture the author’s 

writing style regardless of the text’s topic, as the 

use of these words in a text is normally unrelated 

to the topic, and yet there appear to be significant 

differences in the way different authors use them 

in writing. Ouamour and Sayoud (2012) tested 

different character and word features using an 

SMO-SVM classifier on text samples extracted 

from textbooks. These features included character 

bigrams, character trigrams, character tetragrams, 

single words, word bigrams, word trigrams, word 

tetra grams, and rare words. The texts were 

collected from ten different authors who wrote 

their texts in the domain of travel. Kumar and 

Chaurasia (2012) used character n-grams, 

especially bigrams and trigrams, to solve the 

problem of authorship verification. The authors 

investigated the bigram in different positions in 

words. They tested bigrams in the initial, the 

middle position, and at the end of words. The tests 

were conducted for both English and Arabic texts. 

The results showed that the initial bigrams and 

trigrams were the most useful in accomplishing 

the task. Howedi and Mohd (2014) examined 

many features to classify authors according to 

style. The authors used different linguistic 

features such as character bigrams, character 

trigrams, single words, word bigrams, and rare 

words. The dataset used in these experiments was 

the same data as used by Siham and Sayoud 

(2012), the AAAT Corpus of ten ancient Arabic 

travellers.  Al-Zubaidi and Ehsan (2017) used the 

300 most frequent features to predict the authors 

in Arabic texts. The dataset consisted of 18 books 

written by three old Arabic philosophers, Ibnjuzia, 

Sakhawy, and Tusi. Each one of the authors was 

represented by six books. Five books were used 

for training, and the sixth book was used for 

testing purposes. In this paper we used different 

linguistic features to discriminate between 

authors. To predict the authors of the texts, we 

represented each text sample by a vector. The 

vectors were numerical representations containing 

the frequency of the linguistic feature used in each 

sample. We then created a matrix where the 

columns corresponded to linguistic features (i.e. 

word frequencies), and the rows corresponded to 

individual texts. Finally, the classic Delta distance 

was used to calculate the distance between 

vectors. A matrix was produced of the distances 

between each pair of texts, and these distances 

were used as the basis of the clustering techniques 

we used, Hierarchical Agglomerative Cluster 

Analysis (HACA) and Principal Component 

Analysis (PCA). The initial vectors were also 

used as inputs to a set of machine learning 

techniques.   

3 Corpus Description 

To check whether the chapters included in the 

book “Liberation of Women” were written by 

Qassim Amin or Mohammed Abdu, we built a 

corpus containing their writings about women. 

The corpus contained three different sources. Two 

of these were written by Qassim Amin, and the 

last one was written by Mohammed Abdu. The 

first texts used in the experiments were extracted 

from the first book “The Liberation of Women” 

which were the chapters about women, and these 

were the chapters which Mohammed Emara 

stated were written by Mohmmed Abdu and 

included in Amin’s book without any mention that 

they were Abdu’s contribution to this book. 

Emara assumed that Amin was not qualified 

enough to discuss this topic and supported his 

view by citing new interpretations for verses from 

the Holy Quran in these chapters. He assumed 

that only Amin’s teacher Mohammed Abdu was 

able to do this at that time. He also stated that the 

writing style of these chapters was more similar to 

Abdu’s style than Amin’s style. The second set of 

http://www.amu-dam.net/


 

 

 

texts used in the experiments, written by Amin, 

were extracted from the book “The New Women”. 

This book, written later by Qassim Amin after the 

death of Abdu also spoke about women’s rights 

and asked the community to give women more 

rights. The last texts contained in the corpus were 

a collection of Mohammed Abdu’s texts which 

were written about the rights of women. The texts 

were extracted from a book written by 

Mohammed Emara to discuss Abdu’s opinions on 

women’s rights in Islam. The following table 

describes the texts used to build the corpus: 
 

Book Author The extracted texts 

The 

Liberation 

of Women 

Qassim 

Amin 

G_L1 to GL5 

The New 

Women 

Qassim 

Amin 

G_N2 to GN5 

Mohammed 

Abdu's 

Opinion on 

Women 

Mohammed 

Emara 

M_MAB2_1 to 

M_MAB2_5 

Table 1:  Corpus Description. 

4 Experiments 

 In this case study we extracted various 

samples from each book to compare the style of 

the writing. Many linguistic features of the texts 

were then examined including the most frequent 

words, character 3 grams, and character 6 grams, 

to discriminate between Abdu and Qassim Amin. 

Two different methods for analysis were used to 

investigate the case which were Agglomerative 

Clustering, and Principal Component Analysis 

(Eder et al., 2016). Machine learning techniques 

were also used to label the texts according to 

author. 

4.1 Most Frequent Words Cluster 

In this experiment we used the most frequent 

words as a feature set to discriminate between the 

two authors. This set of most frequent words is 

usually a set of the function words. This set can be 

used by the same author to write on two different 

topics because these words are topic independent. 

The most frequent hundred words were used to 

automatically cluster the texts according to style. 

The following graph shows that the texts which 

were extracted from the book “The Liberation of 

Women” was clustered beside the texts which 

were extracted from the book “The New Women” 

which confirm that these texts were written by 

Qassim Amin, and the texts written by Abdu were 

clustered in a different branch on the left as shown 

below: 

 
Figure 1: The most frequent words cluster 

4.2 Character n-grams Clusters 

In this experiment, we used the features 

character 3-grams and character 6-grams. We 

uploaded the corpus after doing the tokenization 

process to produce the corpus in the required 

format. The tokenizer made a window of a 

specific length and then cut the words into the 

required length assuming that the space between 

words is a character so that we can find a token 

consisting of one character from a word and 

another character from the next word, 

concatenated with a space. For example, the token 

[y m] can exist in the corpus among the character 

3-grams tokens as a result of the two words 

(happy man). The following graphs show the 

results of the Agglomerative Clustering method 

using the features character 3-grams and character 

6-grams. 

 
 Figure 2: Character 3-grams cluster 

 



 

 

 

From Figure 2 we can see that the texts from the 

two books which were written by Qassim Amin 

were clustered together while the texts from 

Mohammed Abdu were clustered in the leftmost 

branch of the tree. In addition, the samples from 

the two books written by Amin were mixed inside 

the cluster, and this shows that this feature was a 

very useful feature to capture the fingerprint of 

Qassim Amin. The same scenario occurred when 

we used character 6- grams as a feature set to 

discriminate between the two authors. Figure 3 

below was produced by using character 6-grams 

as the feature set. 

 
 

Figure 3: Character 6-grams cluster 

4.3 Principal Components Analysis (PCA) 

 To confirm the results obtained by using the 

clustering technique using different feature sets, 

we used PCA analysis to find whether any groups 

of tokens occurred together in a specific group of 

documents more than the others so these could be 

used as a feature set to discriminate between the 

two authors. We ran the experiment using the 100 

most frequent words as the feature set and found 

out that the first principal component was useful 

to sperate the two authors in a clear graph 

showing that the texts which were extracted from 

the book “The Liberation of Women” were more 

similar to the texts which were extracted from the 

book “The New Women” than the text by 

Muhammad Abdu. Figure 4 shows that the texts 

which were written by Amin are separated on the 

left-hand side and the features used to build the 

model were also shown in the graph. The most 

frequent words show that Mohammed Abdu uses 

the term “Man” (الرجل) while Qassim Amin use 

the term “Men” (الرجال) when they speak about 

the male gender.  

 
Figure 4: PCA using the most frequent words 

 

In another experiment, we extracted the different 

morphemes which were available in the corpus by 

using the Farasa tools (http://alt.qcri.org/farasa/) 

to do word segmentation and the Stylo package 

(Eder et al., 2016) to find the most frequent 

features and used them as a feature set to 

discriminate between the two authors. The PCA 

showed that the different morphemes could be 

used to discriminate between the two authors as 

the texts of Qassim Amin were separated from 

Abdu’s texts by the first principal component. The 

following list of morphemes ( لت/ وا/  /هن / ب   /ف /

 were observed on Abdu’s side while the (ال

following list of morphemes (ها  /ات/ نا  ةي/ / ) were 

observed on Amin’s side on the graph. 



 

 

 

 
Figure 5: PCA using morphemes and Function 

words 

4.4 Machine Learning Techniques 

To check the results obtained by Agglomerative 

Clustering and PCA, we used machine learning 

techniques to find whither the chapters which 

were extracted from the book “Liberation of 

Women” would be classified or labelled as texts 

written by Qassim Amin or Mohammed Abdu. 

Ten samples were extracted from the book “The 

Liberation of Women” to be labelled by the 

classifier, and the texts from the book “The New 

Women”, besides the texts by Mohammed Abdu, 

were used as a training corpus to extract the 

useful patterns which could be used to predict the 

disputed texts. Five different machine learning 

classifiers were then used to predict the author of 

the ten samples, and the results confirmed that the 

sample texts were written by Qassim Amin. The 

following table shows the classifiers used together 

with the accuracy achieved using the different 

classifiers: 

 

Table 2:  Classifiers Accuracies 

This table shows the different accuracies obtained 

by using the different classifiers. For example, the 

accuracy 90% means that 9 samples out of the ten 

were classified as written by Qassim Amin and 

one sampled was classified as written by Abdu. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced a case study about 

Qassim Amin’s book “The Liberation of 

Women.” Qassim Amin was a liberal reformer 

who advocated giving women more rights in the 

Arab and Muslim communities. He assumed that 

the lack of education for women could affect not 

only women but also the whole society. Later 

some scholars including Mohammed Emara 

(Emara, 1997) reported that there are some 

chapters included in Amin’s book “The liberation 

of Women” which were written secretly by his 

teacher Mohammed Abdu. We decided to use the 

Computational Stylometry to investigate this 

argument and to find whither Abdu wrote these 

chapters or not. To do the experiment we built a 

corpus which contained different texts extracted 

from Amin and Abdu’s books. The disputed texts 

together with other texts extracted from the book 

“The New Women” were used to compare Amin’s 

style against the texts which were extracted from 

Abdu books on the same topic. Different features 

were used to investigate the texts’ writing style 

including the most frequent words, Character 3-

grams, and Character 6-grams. The character n-

grams were very useful features as they captured 

the fingerprint of the author.  The extracted texts 

from the two books written by Amin clustered 

together in one branch in the clustering tree. To 

confirm the results obtained using the clustering 

technique we used Principal Component Analysis 

(PCA) to analyse the texts. The results confirmed 

that the disputed texts were written by Amin and 

not by Mohammed Abdu, and the texts from 

Amin were perfectly separated by the first 

principal component. We then used machine 

learning techniques to check whether we can 

successfully label the texts according to the 

author’s writing styles. To do that we extracted 

samples from “Liberation of Women” and used 

them as a testing corpus to be labeled by the 

classifiers. We also extracted samples from “New 

Women” together with texts written by 

Mohammed Abdu on women’s rights to form a 

Classifier Words Character 6-

gram 

NSC 90% 90% 

SVM 90% 90% 

Naïve Bayes 80% 70% 

Delta 90% 80% 

KNN 80% 70% 



 

 

 

training corpus. Five different classifiers were 

then used to find the fingerprint of the authors 

from the training corpus to build the model and to 

automatically predict the author of the texts 

available in the testing corpus.  The results 

showed that the disputed texts were more similar 

to Qassim Amin’s style than Abdu’s style. In the 

future we would like to extend our experiments 

by adding more works written by Abdu and 

Qassim, possibly on different topics, as the most 

frequent words set of features is topic 

independent.  

 

References 

Abdelali, Ahmed, Kareem Darwish, Nadir Durrani, 

and Hamdy Mubarak. "Farasa: A fast and furious 

segmenter for arabic." In Proceedings of the 2016 

Conference of the North American Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics: 

Demonstrations, pp. 11-16. 2016.  

 

Mustafa, Tareef Kamil, Ammar Adil Abdul Razzaq, 

and Ehsan Ali Al-Zubaidi. "Authorship Arabic Text 

Detection According to Style of Writing by using 

(SABA) Method." Asian Journal of Applied 

Sciences (ISSN: 2321–0893) 5, no. 02 (2017). 

 

Amin, Qasim. "the Liberation of Women." In 

Modernist and Fundamentalist Debates in Islam, 

pp. 163-181. Palgrave Macmillan, New York, 

2000.  

 

Amin, Qasim, Qāsim Amīn, and ،قاسم أمين. The 

liberation of women: And, the new woman: Two 

documents in the history of Egyptian feminism. 

American Univ in Cairo Press, 2000. 

 

Eder, Maciej, Jan Rybicki, and Mike Kestemont. 

"Stylometry with R: a package for computational 

text Analysis." R journal 8, no. 1 (2016). 

 

Emara, Mohammed., 2004. Islam and Women in 

Mohammed Abdu’s Opinion.  Dar al-rashad, 

Cairo. 

 

Hadjadj, Hassina, and Halim Sayoud. "Towards an 

authorship analysis of two religious documents." 

In 2016 8th International Conference on 

Modelling, Identification and Control (ICMIC), 

pp. 369-373. IEEE, 2016. 

Howedi, Fatma, and Masnizah Mohd. "Text 

classification for authorship attribution using 

Naive Bayes classifier with limited training data." 

Computer Engineering and Intelligent Systems 5, 

no. 4 (2014): 48-56. 

Kumar, Sushil, and Mousmi A. Chaurasia. 

"Assessment on stylometry for multilingual 

manuscript." IOSR Journal of Engineering 2, no. 9 

(2012): 1-6. 

 

Ouamour, Siham, and Halim Sayoud. "Authorship 

attribution of ancient texts written by ten arabic 

travelers using a smo-svm classifier." In 2012 

International Conference on Communications and 

Information Technology (ICCIT), pp. 44-47. IEEE, 

2012. 

 

Ouamour, Siham, and Halim Sayoud. "Authorship 

attribution of short historical arabic texts based on 

lexical features." In 2013 International Conference 

on Cyber-Enabled Distributed Computing and 

Knowledge Discovery, pp. 144-147. IEEE, 2013. 

 

Shaker, Kareem, and David Corne. "Authorship 

attribution in arabic using a hybrid of evolutionary 

search and linear discriminant analysis." In 2010 

UK Workshop on Computational Intelligence 

(UKCI), pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2010. 


