



















































Modeling Quantification and Scope in Abstract Meaning Representations


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 28–33
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

28

Modeling Quantification and Scope in Abstract Meaning Representations

James Pustejovsky, Nianwen Xue, Kenneth Lai
Department of Computer Science

Brandeis University
Waltham, MA USA

{jamesp,xuen,klai12 }@brandeis.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we propose an extension to
Abstract Meaning Representations (AMRs) to
encode scope information of quantifiers and
negation, in a way that overcomes the seman-
tic gaps of the schema while maintaining its
cognitive simplicity. Specifically, we address
three phenomena not previously part of the
AMR specification: quantification, negation
(generally), and modality. The resulting rep-
resentation, which we call “Uniform Mean-
ing Representation” (UMR), adopts the pred-
icative core of AMR and embeds it under a
“scope” graph when appropriate. UMR rep-
resentations differ from other treatments of
quantification and modal scope phenomena in
two ways: (a) they are more transparent; and
(b) they specify default scope when possible.

1 Abstract Meaning Representations

Abstract Meaning Representations (AMRs) have
recently become popular as a strategy for encod-
ing a kind of canonical meaning for natural lan-
guage sentences (Banarescu et al., 2013). They
differ significantly from other encoding schemes
used in NLP—e.g., minimal recursion seman-
tics (MRS)—in terms of their expressiveness for
several semantic phenomena in natural language
(Copestake et al., 2005). Still, in spite of such
shortcomings, there is a major attraction to the
general philosophy of this approach: by focusing
on the predicative core of a sentence, it is an in-
tuitive representation for both interpreting the se-
mantics of a sentence, and perhaps more impor-
tantly, for use in annotation efforts.

An AMR represents the meaning of a sentence
with a single-rooted, directed, acyclic graph with
nodes labeled with concepts and edges labeled
with relations. The primary component of an
AMR is the predicate-argument structure, with the
predicate being a concept that takes a number of

arguments as its children. The predicate and its
arguments are represented as nodes in the AMR
graph, and the edges represent the relation be-
tween the predicate and each of its arguments. As
an illustration, the PENMAN notation and graph
representation below in (2) represent the AMR for
the sentence in (1).

(1) John can’t afford a car at the moment.

(2) a. (p / possible-01
:ARG0 (a / afford-01

:ARG0 (p2 / person
:name (n / name

:op "John"))
:ARG1 (c /car)
:time (m / moment))

:polarity -)

b.
possible-01

-

afford-01

person
car

moment

name

“John”

ARG0

polarity

ARG0
ARG1

time

name

op

Propositions in an AMR are sense-
disambiguated (Palmer et al., 2005). In the
example above, “possible-01” refers to the first
sense of “possible” while “afford-01” represents
the first sense of “afford”. A predicate can take
a number of core arguments (ARG0, ARG1,
etc.) as well as adjunct arguments (e.g., time).
The semantic roles for the core arguments are
defined with respect to each sense of a predicate



29

and they are drawn from the PropBank frame
files 1. For example, the semantic roles for the
core arguments of different senses of “afford” are
defined as follows:

(3) a. afford-01: be able to spare, have the fi-
nancial means
ARG0: haver of financial means, agent
ARG2: costly thing, theme

b. afford-02: provide, make available
ARG0: provider, agent
ARG1: provided, theme
ARG2: recipient

The attraction of AMR-style representations
and annotations is the adoption of a predicative
core element along with its arguments: e.g., an
event and its participants. This, in turn, leads to an
event-rooted graph that has many advantages for
parsing and matching algorithms. As can be seen
from the example, the predicate-argument struc-
ture is front and center in AMR, and we consider
this to be one of its strengths.

However, as it currently stands, AMR does
not represent quantification or its interaction with
modality and negation (Bos, 2016). The challenge
is to maintain the focus on the predicate-argument
structure while also adequately accounting for lin-
guistic phenomena that operate above the level of
the core AMR representation, in particular quan-
tification and modality.

2 Quantification and Scope

It can be argued that, besides graph-based match-
ing over predicative structures, AMR does not pro-
vide good support for logical inference because
it does not yet properly handle scoping and other
phenomena. For example, in (4), there is a single
talk that everyone in the room is listening to, while
in (5), each person has their own coffee. How-
ever, AMR does not distinguish between these two
cases: it could just as well be that everyone in the
room listened to a different talk, or that everyone
at noon shared a single cup of coffee.

(4) a. Everyone in the room listened to a talk.
b. ∃y[talk(y) ∧ ∀x∃e[person(x) ∧
inRoom(x)→ listen(e, x, y)]]
c. (l / listen-01

:ARG0 (p / person
:mod (a / all)
:location (r / room))

:ARG1 (t / talk))

1https://verbs.colorado.edu/verb-index

(5) a. Everyone drank a coffee at noon.
b. ∀x[person(x) → ∃y∃e[coffee(y) ∧
drink(e, x, y) ∧@(e, noon)]]
c. (d / drink-01

:ARG0 (p / person
:mod (a / all))

:ARG1 (c / coffee)
:time (n / noon))

In fact, this inability of AMRs to distinguish
scoping relations among quantifiers also extends
to negation and modality. For example, the AMR
for the sentence “Every student did not fail” is
given below.

(6) a. (d / fail-01
:ARG0 (s / student

:mod (a / all))
:polarity -)

b.
fail-01

- student

all

polarity

ARG0

mod

The sentence is ambiguous, however, between the
readings “for every student, that student did not
fail” and “it is not the case that every student
failed”.

While MRS and other flattened semantic repre-
sentations provide a solution to these issues, giv-
ing faithful translations of scope with typed ex-
pressions, there are several drawbacks to these ap-
proaches. Flat representations reveal no semantic
core. Hence, as annotations, the resulting struc-
tures are difficult to interpret and inspect. Further-
more, quantifier scope is often underspecified even
when it can be disambiguated in context. Depen-
dency MRS (DMRS) is one exception to this in the
MRS family of representations (Copestake, 2009),
where dependency relations link argument heads
to the major predicator of the sentence.

In our research, we propose to represent scope
relationally, while maintaining both the central-
ity of the predicative core of the sentence (e.g.,
listen, drink), as well as the syntactic integrity
of the quantified expression (e.g., every person).
A relational interpretation for scope provides a
first-order interpretation: it references two specific
nodes in the graph, and orders one relative to the
other. This operates over generalized quantifiers
(some book, most people), negation (not, no), as
well as modals (possibly, likely, must). From an



30

annotation perspective, this is quite different from
flat structures, since a human judgment in scope
between two elements is directly reflected in the
resulting graph. There are complex interactions
between negation, modal expressions, and quan-
tified NPs that we will examine, first representa-
tionally, and then experimentally with small-scale
annotation and testing.

We believe there are advantages to adopting an
AMR-style representation for predicate-argument
forms of sentences (Banarescu et al., 2013). Given
the complexity inherent in the semantics of num-
ber, negation, and quantification, we believe that
a similar approach to the annotation of scope has
some advantages. These include the following:

• It maintains a focus on the predicative core
of the sentence;

• There is likely a lower cognitive load for an-
notation by non-experts;

• Semantic relations are transparent in the
graphical representation.

Addressing the problems associated with scope
adopting this approach results in a representa-
tion we call “Uniform Meaning Representation”
(UMR), where the predicative core of AMR is
maintained, and embedded under a “scope” graph
when required.

3 Towards a Uniform Meaning
Representation for Scope

In this section, we illustrate our approach to en-
coding the expression of quantifier scope in UMR.
We draw on some work within the ISO annotation
community, where the problem of explicitly anno-
tating scoping relations of events and temporal or
spatial quantifiers has been addressed.

To explicitly represent relative scope of quanti-
fied expressions, ISO-Space (Pustejovsky, 2017)
uses the @quant attribute (adopted from ISO-
TimeML), applying it to spatial entities, and in
addition uses the attribute @scopes to specify a
scoping relation. The following example, taken
from ISO 24617-7:2014, illustrates this:

(7) a. A computerse1 is onss1 every deskse2.
b. <spatialEntity id=“se1” pred=“computer”

quant=“1” scopes=“∅”/>
<spatialEntity id=“se2” pred=“desk”

quant=“every” scopes=“#se1”/>

From a semantic point of view, however, this use
of the @scopes attribute is unsatisfactory since the
relative scoping of quantifications over different
sets of entities is not a local property of one of
these quantifications; therefore an annotation such
as (7) does not have a compositional semantics.
Therefore, we follow (Bunt et al., 2018) and use a
link structure, scopeLink, to represent scope rela-
tions among quantifying NPs, where relType takes
a value of ‘narrower’, ‘wider’, or ‘equal’. For the
example in (7), this amounts to marking the uni-
versal as taking wide scope over the indefinite.

(8) a. scopeLink(arg1, arg2, relType)
b. <scopeLink arg1=“#se2” arg2=“#se1”
relType=“wider”/>

We modify this scoping relation by introducing
the predicative domain as an additional argument,

(9) a. λpredλa1λa0[scope(a0, a1, pred)]

and model the semantic effect of this relation
as similar to the mechanism of Cooper Storage
(Cooper, 1975) or a continuation-passing style
interpretation of generalized quantifiers (Barker,
2002).
[[a0]]([[a1]]([[pred ]]))

For example, consider a relation with two quanti-
fier phrases, and a scoping of the direct objectQP2
over QP1:

(10) a. [QP1]arg0 pred [QP2]arg1
b. scope(QP1, QP0, pred)

The ordering of arguments determines the func-
tion application order of each expression, as with
continuation-passing style.

This representation is convenient, in that we can
maintain a rooted graph structure with the scope
relation as the root node, as demonstrated below.

(11) a. (s / scope
:pred (b / be-located-at-91

:ARG0 (c / computer)
:ARG1 (d / desk

:quant (e / every)))
:ARG0 d
:ARG1 c)

b.



31

scope

be-located-at-91

computer desk

every

predARG1 ARG0

ARG0

ARG1

quant

Given the scope-rooted graph above, we apply an
interpretation function that translates the graph to
an appropriate first-order expression. This gives:

(12) [[every desk]]([[a computer]]([[be located]]))

For the present annotation, we arrive at the expres-
sion in (13).

(13) ∀y[desk(y) → ∃x[computer(x) ∧
be-located-at(x, y)]]

With the introduction of scope over quantifiers,
the annotation provided by a UMR can be com-
pared more directly to the approach and represen-
tations deployed in the Groningen Meaning Bank
(GMB) and the Parallel Meaning Bank (PMB)
projects (Bos et al., 2017; Abzianidze et al., 2017;
Van Noord et al., 2018). In this work, sentences
are expressed as DRSs within Discourse Repre-
sentation Theory (Kamp and Reyle, 1993). How-
ever, most of the sentences in PMB with potential
quantifier scope ambiguities involve temporal ex-
pressions and their relative scope over event vari-
ables, rather than quantified arguments to the verb.
An example is that shown in (14).

(14) a. John golfed every Sunday.
b. ∀t[Sunday(t)→ ∃e[golf(e, j) ∧ on(e, t)]]

The strategy taken by (Bos et al., 2017), followed
here as well, is to scope temporal expressions over
the events they govern.

Now let us see how the scope relation can be de-
ployed to handle negation and modality in UMR.
Consider first the treatment of modals in AMR. As
seen in (2) above, modals are treated as predicative
nodes. Hence, from (p / possible-01 :ARG0
phi), we can derive the equivalent propositional
modal expression, 3φ. However, in (2) we need
to translate the polarity over the modal appropri-
ately: ¬3φ.

In UMR, the scope relation acts as a root node
assigning the polarity value as taking scope over
the modal, along with its body. Consider the UMR
graph as shown below. Note that because there
may be multiple negations in a sentence, we index
negations, e.g., (n2 / not).

(15) a. (s / scope
:pred (p / possible-01

:ARG0 (a / afford-01
:ARG0 (p2 / person

:name (n / name
:op "John"))

:ARG1 (c /car)
:time (m / moment))

:polarity (n2 / not))
:ARG0 n2
:ARG1 p) b.

scope

possible-01

not

afford-01

person
car

moment

name

“John”

predARG0
ARG1

ARG0

polarity

ARG0
ARG1

time

name

op

The graph-interpretation function continues walk-
ing down the tree, and expands the Skolemized
form for ‘car’ into a quantified expression, inside
the scope of the modal, as shown below.

(16) ¬3[∃x[car(x)∧∃e[afford(e, j, x)∧@(e,N)]]

This can be compared to the first-order modal ex-
pression generated by (Bos, 2015; Bos et al., 2017)
for the sentence as shown below in (17).

(17) ¬∃x[car(x)∧3∃e[afford(e, j, x)∧@(e,N)]]

Thus far we have briefly examined the follow-
ing semantic constructions: quantifier scope for
arguments; temporal adjuncts over events; and rel-
ative scope of negation and modality.

Now consider the interaction of negation with
quantifiers in AMR, as seen in the possible inter-
pretations of (18).



32

(18)
survive-01

- passenger
polarity

ARG0

There are two interpretations consistent with this
AMR graph.

(19) a. There is no event of a passenger surviv-
ing (no one survived).
¬∃e∃x[survive(e, x) ∧ person(x)]

b. There is a passenger who did not survive.
∃x[person(x) ∧ ¬∃e[survive(e, x)]]

With the introduction of the scope relation node,
we can distinguish these interpretations: for ex-
ample, the reading in (19a) would be represented
as shown below.

(20)
scope

survive-01

not passenger

pred
ARG0

ARG1

polarity

ARG0

4 Conclusion

In this short note, we introduced a representation
and interpretive strategy for capturing scope re-
lations between quantifiers, negation, and modals
in AMR. This required an enrichment to the ba-
sic vocabulary of AMR that we refer to as a Uni-
form Meaning Representation. The UMR strategy
adopts one of the more attractive features of AMR,
the predicative core, while increasing the repre-
sentation language’s expressive coverage with the
introduction of a scope node, determining the rel-
ative scope between its two arguments. The inter-
pretation of a specific quantifier or modal is lex-
ically determined. This work is part of a com-
bined effort to enrich the representation of AMRs
with tense, (Donatelli et al., 2019), discourse rela-
tions (O’Gorman et al., 2018), quantification, and
modality.

Acknowledgement

We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their helpful comments. This work is

supported by the IIS Division of National Sci-
ence Foundation via Award No. 1763926 enti-
tled “Building a Uniform Meaning Representation
for Natural Language Processing”. All views ex-
pressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the view of the Na-
tional Science Foundation.



33

References
Lasha Abzianidze, Johannes Bjerva, Kilian Evang,

Hessel Haagsma, Rik Van Noord, Pierre Ludmann,
Duc-Duy Nguyen, and Johan Bos. 2017. The paral-
lel meaning bank: Towards a multilingual corpus of
translations annotated with compositional meaning
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03964.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with
Discourse, pages 178–186.

Chris Barker. 2002. Continuations and the nature
of quantification. Natural language semantics,
10(3):211–242.

Johan Bos. 2015. Open-domain semantic parsing with
boxer. In Proceedings of the 20th nordic con-
ference of computational linguistics (NODALIDA
2015), pages 301–304.

Johan Bos. 2016. Expressive power of abstract mean-
ing representations. Computational Linguistics,
42(3):527–535.

Johan Bos, Valerio Basile, Kilian Evang, Noortje J
Venhuizen, and Johannes Bjerva. 2017. The gronin-
gen meaning bank. In Nancy Ide and James Puste-
jovsky, editors, Handbook of linguistic annotation,
pages 463–496. Springer.

Harry Bunt, James Pustejovsky, and Kiyong Lee. 2018.
Towards an iso standard for the annotation of quan-
tification. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC-2018).

Robin Hayes Cooper. 1975. Montague’s semantic the-
ory and transformational syntax.

Ann Copestake. 2009. Slacker semantics: why su-
perficiality, dependency and avoidance of commit-
ment can be the right way to go. In Proceedings of
the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the
ACL (EACL 2009), pages 1–9.

Ann Copestake, Dan Flickinger, Carl Pollard, and
Ivan A Sag. 2005. Minimal recursion semantics: An
introduction. Research on language and computa-
tion, 3(2-3):281–332.

Lucia Donatelli, Nathan Schneider, William Croft, and
Michael Regan. 2019. Tense and aspect semantics
for sentential amr. Proceedings of the Society for
Computation in Linguistics, 2(1):346–348.

Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From discourse to
logic, volume 42 of studies in linguistics and philos-
ophy.

Tim O’Gorman, Michael Regan, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Her-
mjakob, Kevin Knight, and Martha Palmer. 2018.
AMR beyond the sentence: the multi-sentence AMR
corpus. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
3693–3702, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

James Pustejovsky. 2017. ISO-Space: Annotating
static and dynamic spatial information. In Hand-
book of Linguistic Annotation, pages 989–1024.
Springer.

Rik Van Noord, Lasha Abzianidze, Hessel Haagsma,
and Johan Bos. 2018. Evaluating scoped meaning
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08599.

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C18-1313
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C18-1313
https://doi.org/10.1162/0891201053630264
https://doi.org/10.1162/0891201053630264

