




































Pivot Machine Translation in INTERACT Project 

Chao-Hong Liu, Andy Way 

ADAPT Centre 

Dublin City University, Ireland 

chaohong.liu@adaptcentre.ie 

andy.way@adaptcentre.ie 

Catarina Silva and André Martins 

Unbabel 

Lisbon, Portugal 

catarina@unbabel.com 

andre.martins@unbabel.com 

 

 Abstract 

The INTERnAtional network on Crisis 

Translation (INTERACT) project under 

EU Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions 

(MSCA) Research and Innovation Staff 

Exchange (RISE) Programme aimed at 

researching translation in crisis scenarios. 

In this extended abstract, we present the 

work on Pivot Machine Translation under 

the INTERACT project. 

1 Introduction  

The EU INTERACT project is a staff exchange 

project which brings together researchers from 

different disciplines to collaborate on the issues 

arise in delivering translation in crisis scenarios. 

The project is led by Dr. Sharon O’Brien at Dublin 

City University and the consortium also includes 

University College London, Unbabel, Microsoft, 

Translators without Borders, Cochrane, Univer-

sity of Auckland, Arizona State University. The 

project starts from April 2017 for 36 months. 

There are many issues addressed in different 

work packages in the project, e.g. involving civil 

translator and ethics. In this extended abstract, we 

describe the work on automatic translation, which 

includes building and adapting machine transla-

tion (MT) systems for health-related contents in 

scenario language translation pairs. 

As a target scenario to bring translation for cri-

sis situations, we focused on building MT systems 

for translation of health-related contents where 

                                                 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. This work has partially received funding from 

the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innova-

tion programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions 

parallel corpora for a language pair are very small 

or do not even exist. 

There are several approaches to build MT sys-

tems under this circumstance. For example, in Wu 

and Wang (2007), a small parallel corpus is used 

to interpolate translation probabilities of a target 

translation pair in statistical machine translation 

(SMT). Utiyama and Isahara (2007) also com-

pared two different SMT strategies, phrase-trans-

lation and sentence-translation. pivot machine 

translation (Pivot MT) is the sentence-translation 

strategy which builds two cascading MT systems 

(A-to-B and B-to-C) to realize translation from A 

to C, with the assumption that the parallel corpora 

(A—B and B—C) are much larger than direct A—

C parallel corpus. The zero-shot neural MT 

(NMT) approach is another method to build MT 

systems without any direct parallel corpus (John-

son, Schuster, Le, et al.) However, experiments on 

the UN Parallel Corpus showed that pivoting with 

sentence-translation strategy is still the best prac-

tice under this circumstance. 

We took three major steps to improve MT qual-

ity for health-related contents. First, manually col-

lected and edited parallel corpora for Arabic—

English and Greek—English are curated. These 

are small corpora at the scale of two thousand sen-

tence pairs, and each of them are separated into 

development and test sets for the training of the 

MT systems. 

Second, we used data selection methods (term 

frequency–inverse document frequency, cross-en-

tropy difference and feature decay algorithm) to 

select data from a large parallel corpus and used 

the selected subset to train the resulting MT 

(Grant No. 734211; the EU INTERACT project). The 

ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology is funded 

under the SFI Research Centres Programme (Grant No. 

13/RC/2106) and is co-funded under the European Regional 

Development Fund. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 120



systems. The results show that it also improved 

performance of NMT systems, in terms of BLEU, 

although the gain is smaller compared to that of 

SMT (Silva, Liu, Poncelas, and Way, 2018). 

Third, we adapted the MT models using the cu-

rated development sets to improve the perfor-

mance of in-domain (health-related contents) 

translation. We also compared pivot MT systems 

using UN Parallel Corpus 1.0 and participated in 

the China Workshop on Machine Translation 

(CWMT) shared task on pivot MT (Liu, Silva, 

Wang, and Way, 2018). Our pivot MT system 

took the first place in terms of METEOR and 

translation edit rate (TER) in the shared task. 

In this project, we have reviewed, identified 

and built MT systems where only small parallel 

corpora are available in the scenario language 

translation pairs. We also manually curated Ara-

bic—English and Greek—English parallel cor-

pora of health-related contents in crisis situations, 

as development and test sets for MT system train-

ing. The performance is improved in terms of 

BLEU using the strategies described above and is 

now being evaluated by professional linguists for 

detailed assessment. 

References  

Catarina Cruz Silva, Chao-Hong Liu,  Alberto 

Poncelas and Andy Way, "Extracting In-domain 

Training Corpora for Neural Machine Translation 

Using Data Selection Methods,” pp. 224–231, The 

Third Conference on Machine Translation 

(WMT18).  

Chao-Hong Liu, Catarina Cruz Silva, Longyue Wang, 

and Andy Way, “Pivot Machine Translation Using 

Chinese as Pivot Language,” The 14th China 

Workshop on Machine Translation (CWMT 2018). 

In: Chen J., Zhang J. (eds) Machine Translation. 

CWMT 2018. Communications in Computer and 

Information Science, vol 954. Springer, Singapore. 

Johnson, M., Schuster, M., Le, Q.V., Krikun, M., Wu, 

Y., Chen, Z., Thorat, N., Viégas, F., Wattenberg, M., 

Corrado, G., Hughes, M., Dean, J.: Google’s 

multilingual neural machine translation system: 

Enabling zero-shot translation. Transactions of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics 5, 339–

351 (2017) 

Utiyama, M., Isahara, H.: A comparison of pivot 

methods for phrase-based statistical 

machinetranslation. In: Proceedings of Human 

Language Technologies, The Conference of the 

NorthAmerican Chapter of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2007). pp.484–

491. Rochester, USA (2007) 

Wu, H., Wang, H.: Pivot language approach for phrase-

based statistical machine translation.Machine 

Translation21(3), 165–181 (2007) 

 

 
 

 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 121


