




































Hungarian translators’ perceptions of neural machine translation in 

the European Commission 

Ágnes Lesznyák 

European Commission 

Directorate-General for Translation 

agnes.lesznyak@ec.europa.eu 

 

 
Abstract 

This paper summarises findings from 

structured interviews with Hungarian 

translators in the European Commission’s 

Directorate-General for Translation on 

their experiences with neural machine 

translation as a translation aid since 2017. 

The translators have widely divergent 

views on the use and usefulness of neural 

machine translation and varying practices 

when it comes to integrating it into their 

work. The paper concludes that human 

factors play a crucial role in the success 

of application and argues that translators’ 

attitudes and intriguing cognitive pro-

cesses merit greater scientific attention. 

1 Introduction 

With the emergence of neural technology, the 

quality of machine translation (MT) output has 

improved rapidly in recent years, in particular for 

languages with more complex morphology, such 

as Hungarian. Nevertheless, human intervention 

is still indispensable for checking and improving 

texts where the accuracy of information transfer 

is vital, such as in the legal domain, or texts 

intended for publication (Ive et al. 2018; Way 

2018; Knowles et al. 2019). 

Research in this area has focused mainly on 

aspects of post-editing (PE), the traditional 

treatment applied by translators to improve the 

quality of MT output.
1
 A number of studies 

(e.g. Plitt and Masselot 2010; Koponen 2012; 

                                                 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-

tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. The opinions expressed here are those of the 

author and should not be considered to represent the Euro-

pean Commission’s official position. 
1 For an overview of the practice of and research into PE, 

see Koponen (2016). 

Guerberof 2014; Koehn and Germann 2014) 

have found that PE productivity and effort differ 

greatly between individual translators dealing 

with MT output. However, human factors such as 

professional translators’ views and practices, 

have attracted relatively little academic attention. 

In a groundbreaking study, Cadwell et al. 

(2017) investigate what influences the adoption 

of MT by professional translators in two different 

institutional settings, one being the European 

Commission’s Directorate-General for Transla-

tion (DGT). They conclude that translators’ sense 

and level of ‘agency’ have a crucial impact on 

their attitudes towards MT. 

The changing nature of MT output (due to rap-

id technological development) may also influ-

ence translators’ perceptions and work processes. 

Since neural machine translation (NMT) is a 

recent development, the body of relevant re-

search is necessarily small (Castilho et al. 2019). 

By reporting on the experience of professional 

translators working in DGT’s Hungarian Lan-

guage Department, we want to raise awareness of 

aspects of interaction with NMT that are highly 

relevant for practitioners and may require further 

scientific insight, in order to prompt greater ac-

ceptance and more efficient use of this tool. 

2 Background 

2.1 eTranslation 

eTranslation
2
, the successor to the European 

Commission’s MT service MT@EC, has been 

developed by the DGT in the framework of the 

Connecting Europe Facility. It offers statistical 

(SMT) and neural machine translation (NMT) 

into all the 24 official languages of the European 

Union, plus Icelandic and Norwegian. At the 

time of writing, it can be used by officials in the 

                                                 
2 

https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/wiki/display/CEFDIGITAL/

What+is+eTranslation 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 16



EU institutions and all EU Member States, 

Iceland and Norway. It is intended mainly as a 

component of digital services, but it also offers 

stand-alone services for the translation of 

documents and text snippets
3
 and is provided as 

an integrated service for use by DGT translators 

(see section 2.2). eTranslation guarantees data 

confidentiality and security. 

Following a test phase in early 2017, the gen-

eral roll-out of NMT in DGT began with the 

launch of eTranslation in November 2017. 

The emergence of neural technology repre-

sented a breakthrough for MT in language pairs 

involving Hungarian (Tihanyi and Oravecz 

2017). As the level of quality of SMT did not 

allow for efficient PE, DGT’s Hungarian transla-

tors had only used it sporadically. Therefore, 

working with NMT output was most Hungarian 

translators’ first encounter with MT in their pro-

fessional activity.  

2.2 NMT in DGT’s internal workflow 

DGT offers translation services to other 

Commission Directorates-General, who send 

translation requests to a central DGT service that 

pre-processes texts automatically using various 

applications. Relevant segments and documents 

are extracted from predefined databases and a 

normative memory, and subsequently made 

available to translators as tmx files. Since 

July 2018, this pre-processing has involved MT 

into all EU languages (except Irish). The 

resulting tmx file can be imported, together with 

other tmx files, into the CAT tool. 

DGT guidelines for the use of MT set out min-

imum requirements in terms of translators’ tech-

nical knowledge and the amount of MT output 

they are expected to post-edit in order to famil-

iarise themselves with the technology. 

Beyond this, individual translators decide 

whether to use MT output for any given assign-

ment. In principle, they have three options: 

– pre-translate the whole document with the 
pre-processed tmx files provided (including 

MT) and then post-edit the text; or 

– insert the MT.tmx automatically (auto-
populate) and post-edit it segment by seg-

ment; or 

– use the predictive typing function to insert 
chunks offered from the MT.tmx. 

                                                 
3 

https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/etranslation/translateDocument

.html?lang=en  

3 Interviews 

DGT’s Hungarian Language Department 

employs 49 translators and 9 assistants
4
. The 

translators are supported by a terminologist and a 

language technology coordinator. The language 

department also has a quality officer responsible 

for quality management
5
. 

DGT translators have a variety of professional 

backgrounds. Many Hungarian translators have 

studied languages and been formally trained as 

translators. However, some have a degree in law, 

economics or engineering, plus a post-graduate 

diploma or several years of professional experi-

ence in translation. 

Between June 2018 and January 2019, the 

quality officer carried out structured interviews 

for internal quality management purposes with 

38 translators working in the department.
6
 By 

that time translators had been able to use NMT in 

their daily work for 8 to 14 months, mainly in 

translating from English into Hungarian. The 

interviews were not intended as a survey that 

would produce quantifiable results. Rather, the 

aim was to explore translators’ views on NMT, 

their work practices (cf. above options) and prac-

tical issues that had arisen. The findings would 

feed into follow-up quality assurance action. 

Translators were interviewed in Hungarian and 

were asked the following questions: 

– When is it worth using NMT? 
– How do you use NMT? 
– Which language version do you read first? 
– In what way is NMT different from transla-

tion memories (TMs) containing human 

translation? What deserves special attention? 

– What are the advantages of using NMT? 
– As a reviser, are you aware of whether a 

translation was made using NMT? 

Translators were also encouraged to raise and 

discuss any topics that they considered relevant 

to the use of NMT. Therefore, the interviews 

differed considerably in length, from around 20 

to 90 minutes. 

The interviewer made notes of the translators’ 

answers
7
 and analysed and summarised them in a 

                                                 
4
 The figures reflect the situation in April 2019. The number 

of translators and assistants in active service are subject to 

constant change. 
5 On quality management and the role of quality officers see 

Drugan et al. (2018). 
6 Time and workload constraints meant that it was not 

possible to talk to all the translators. No assistants were 

interviewed, as they do not work with NMT. 
7
 For reasons of collegiality, it was not considered 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 17



report. The results were shared and discussed 

with the translators in a half-day workshop. This 

made it possible to double check the interpreta-

tion of the data collected. 

For obvious methodological reasons this paper 

makes no claims of generalizable findings. 

Where ratios are mentioned, this is to highlight 

recurring themes in translators’ reports. Issues 

referred to only once may turn out to be just as 

relevant for the translation process. The themes 

identified here should be verified in future re-

search. 

4 Discussion 

The interviews showed that the translators’ views 

on NMT are highly divergent and their work 

practices vary widely a year after the 

introduction of NMT into the workflow. They 

expressed conflicting opinions on how useful 

NMT was, when it was worth using and how it 

could be used efficiently. Their observations 

were so disparate that the interviewer sometimes 

wondered whether they referred to the same tool. 

The differences were reflected not only in the 

details, but also in the translators’ overall opin-

ions as to the benefits of NMT. Some see NMT 

as a very useful, positive development, while 

others (having tested it on a number of docu-

ments) have stopped using it or use it only spar-

ingly. These findings are in line with those of 

Cadwell et al. (2016), who found no consensus 

among DGT translators on some central ques-

tions relating to the use of MT. 

In the following sections, we summarise and 

discuss recurring themes from the interviews. 

4.1 Factors influencing the usefulness of 
NMT output 

Two factors in particular seem to determine 

whether Hungarian translators in DGT consider 

NMT useful: relevance, and the quality of the 

NMT output, which is perceived as correlating 

with segment length. The latter will be discussed 

in section 4.2. 

The question of relevance of MT output is crit-

ical for DGT translators: very often, EU docu-

ments relate closely to previous documents, such 

as legal bases, or concurrently translated other 

texts. In such cases, consistency between texts is 

paramount: translators must re-use previous 

translations and not translate the new document 

from scratch. As a result, they may prefer TMs 

                                                                          
appropriate to make audio-recordings. 

originating in DGT’s multilingual database 

(Euramis) and judge NMT output counterproduc-

tive or a distraction in certain situations. 

When gauging the usefulness of an NMT.tmx 

file, translators rely on ‘match rates’: some im-

port the file only if the match rate for the docu-

ment is under a certain percentage, typically 50% 

or 30%. Cadwell et al. (2016) report that DGT 

translators working into different languages seem 

to differ in this respect: while those translating to 

some languages use NMT output when the re-

trieval rate is low, others do so when it is high. 

The reason for this apparent disagreement may 

lie in the types of document translated by indi-

vidual translators and an inherent contradiction 

in MT. Generally, NMT output seems to be use-

ful when there is no TM available and translators 

would have to translate from scratch. However, 

NMT works better for high-retrieval, i.e. recur-

ring documents since they were included in the 

training corpus of the engine with high probabil-

ity. Recurrence means that there are TMs availa-

ble which may or may not have priority over MT, 

depending on the document type. NMT output 

may be useful for high retrieval documents if 

there is no obligation to edit fuzzy matches from 

TMs. Therefore, this apparent disparity may re-

quire finer analysis. 

Some translators import the NMT.tmx file and 

take a decision on the usefulness of the NMT 

output at segment level. They typically use NMT 

for ‘empty’ segments, i.e. where reference TMs 

do not return any hits under a certain match rate. 

This approach allows them to respect the ‘rele-

vance’ principle and use NMT at the same time. 

Some translators highlighted the usefulness of 

NMT for urgent assignments, despite the risk of 

the MT output not being sufficiently post-edited. 

They argued that a greater risk in such situations 

is not to have a translation at all, i.e. not to com-

ply with the service provision requirement. 

The domain and the genre of a document does 

not seem to directly influence the perceived use-

fulness of NMT in the DGT working environ-

ment. Interestingly, the interviewees held oppos-

ing views as to the usefulness of NMT for partic-

ular document types such as press material, 

Commission communications and legal acts, and 

used the same arguments for and against NMT. 

There are many possible explanations for this. 

One may be translators’ varying sensitivity to or 

awareness of different types of error in NMT 

output (see section 4.2). Another may lie in their 

working methods. Very few reported unprompted 

that they do a complete read-through of their 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 18



translations. We have reports in another context 

that this is not done in times of high workload. 

There is some evidence (e.g. Dragsted 2006) that 

CAT tools direct translators’ attention to the 

segment level. Läubli et al. (2016) report that the 

document-level (as opposed to segment-level) 

presentation of NMT output influences human 

raters’ perception of quality. 

One interesting factor mentioned by some 

translators as having an impact on the usefulness 

of NMT was their familiarity with the source 

language or the domain in question. They rely on 

NMT more when working from a language in 

which they do not feel confident or in a domain 

with which they are not familiar. This is in line 

with the findings of Moorkens et al. (2018). In 

their study, translators with less experience found 

MT suggestions more useful. Although the Hun-

garian translators reporting this benefit of MT 

had sufficient translation experience, they felt a 

certain lack of language or domain competence 

in the situation in question. 

The next section will discuss translators’ per-

ceptions of NMT output and of the treated 

(i.e. pre-revision) product. 

4.2 Typical errors and quality issues 

The interviewees said that the unpredictable 

quality of NMT output is a key factor 

discouraging them from using it. Quality varies 

widely from one segment to another: some need 

hardly any intervention, while others have to be 

re-translated. Therefore, NMT output always has 

to be checked thoroughly and very often requires 

significant PE. This may explain why translators 

develop certain ‘control’ practices (see 

section 4.3). 

As mentioned above, segment length seems to 

be a decisive determinant of the quality of Hun-

garian NMT output. The interviewees mostly 

agree that short segments are of much better 

quality than longer ones – the former only need 

to be revised, whereas the latter often have to be 

deleted and translated from scratch. The border-

line between ‘short’ and ‘long’ seems to be 

around 30–40 words. 

A correlation between sentence length and 

quality has previously been reported for other 

language pairs (for an overview, see Castilho et 

al. 2018). Koehn and Knowles (2017) found that 

NMT outperformed SMT up to a sentence length 

of about 60 words, but beyond that the quality 

fell off. The fact that 200-word sentences are not 

uncommon in certain types of EU document may 

place a serious constraint on the usefulness of 

NMT in the Commission. 

Translators see longer sentences as problemat-

ic not only because of the potential for lower 

NMT quality but because their complexity pre-

vents a quick assessment of their correctness. It 

takes too much time and cognitive effort to ana-

lyse the components and decide what can be 

used. In such cases, it seems more efficient to re-

translate the segment. 

Translators’ responses as regards recurring er-

rors identified in NMT output confirm the rele-

vant findings in the literature (see e.g. Eisold 

2017; Van Brussel et al. 2018; Yamada 2019). 

Below, we discuss these errors in the case of 

Hungarian. 

Mistranslation and deceptive fluency emerged 

as the two main issues. The sources of the errors 

were not easy to identify, but problems men-

tioned included incorrect word order; misplaced 

attributes; inversion of subject and object; and 

wrong ordering of clauses. Elliptical sentences 

and non-literal meaning also seem frequently to 

give rise to mistranslations. 

While these error types call for close attention 

to the text, intensive PE is needed to correct oth-

er typical errors, such as incorrect information 

structure and missing referential elements and 

sentence connectors. Translators have to convert 

sentence-level MT into a coherent text. 

On the other hand, morphological errors seem 

to be rare in eTranslation’s Hungarian NMT out-

put. Errors mentioned were incorrect endings, 

definite articles and possessive structures, and 

non-concordance between subject and object. 

A typical recurring error in the Hungarian 

NMT output is the translation of proper names 

into fictional words. Since this is a new phenom-

enon for translators and a challenge for automatic 

quality checks, this type of error constitutes a 

risk in the translation process. It may have seri-

ous consequences if it prevents the reader from 

identifying a unique referent. 

A source of serious concern for many transla-

tors was incorrect or inconsistent terminology, 

and in general, the context-independent transla-

tion of vocabulary. This tendency in the NMT 

output is a serious obstacle to efficient work, 

since terms have to be checked one by one in a 

termbase. As DGT translates many legal texts, 

this type of error presents a high risk and in-

creases the need for thorough quality control. 

When asked about the quality of translations 

submitted for revision, the majority of the trans-

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 19



lators
8
 maintained that they clearly recognised 

NMT chunks and segments even if ‘automated 

translation’ was not explicitly signaled in the 

CAT tool. Only three said they could not tell 

whether NMT had been used. When asked about 

‘tell-tale signs’, some cited cases of colleagues 

who had worked reliably for years suddenly 

starting to translate less accurately and produce 

highly amateur solutions. However linguistic 

perfection may also be a give-away if readers 

realise that a text does not follow the institutional 

style they are used to. There were also com-

plaints about the readability of translations, un-

clear references and missing logical links, 

i.e. document-level errors. 

These remarks may indicate that revisers en-

counter more, or other types of, errors than be-

fore the introduction of NMT. Several said that 

pre-revision translations have been of a lower 

quality, requiring more intervention and effort 

from revisers. This may lead to tensions between 

colleagues concerned. 

Generally, the errors that revisers identified as 

revealing the use of NMT were the same as those 

detected in the NMT output itself. This may sug-

gest that at least some errors filter through to the 

quality check phase, indicating flaws at the trans-

lation stage. 

Therefore, in the next section we discuss how 

translators interact with NMT output. 

4.3 Technical aspects of NMT use 

DGT’s Hungarian translators have developed 

divergent practices to integrate NMT into their 

individual workflow in what they consider an 

efficient and safe way. They have shown 

astounding creativity in adapting a technical tool 

to their professional convictions and practices. 

In general, we can say that many translators do 

not post-edit MT, but insert chunks from the 

NMT.tmx into their translations, in much the 

same way as they use other reference material. 

This is because they consider PE a high-risk 

activity: they report that if the NMT output is 

inserted automatically into a segment, they tend 

to be deceived by its linguistic fluency and over-

see errors. If they first take the time to read and 

understand the source language sentence and 

create a mental structure of the equivalent sen-

tence in Hungarian, they can safely insert ele-

ments (or whole sentences) of the NMT output. 

Some do not even copy/paste chunks, but re-type 

                                                 
8
 All translators in the Hungarian department carry out 

revision tasks. 

them. They report processing information in their 

head while they are typing. Others use the CAT 

tool’s predictive typing function to prompt sug-

gestions in context. These findings confirm the 

conclusion of Cadwell et al. (2016) that, for 

some DGT translators, the job means ‘being in 

control of the final outcome’. 

Other translators auto-populate and post-edit 

their text segment by segment with NMT output 

when no other TM is available. But permutations 

of these methods were also reported. 

Very few translators pre-translate the whole 

text with the various reference materials and 

post-edit the translation as a whole. 

Those who pre-translate or auto-populate 

segment by segment reported some emerging 

practices to improve the efficiency of their work. 

They systematically delete sentences that exceed 

30–40 words; they do not understand at first 

reading; or contain references to legal acts. How-

ever, some translators consciously try to retain 

long sentences and to find useful chunks. 

Over time, many translators have developed a 

conscious strategy as to whether to read the 

source segment or the NMT output first. A mi-

nority read the latter first, in order to decide 

whether it is of sufficient quality. If so, they go 

on to read the source sentence and compare the 

meaning. They then decide whether to delete the 

NMT output in part or in full. 

The majority read the source sentence first. 

They argue that this prevents them from being 

influenced by a wrong or unfortunate rendering 

of the source sentence before they have under-

stood its meaning or formed a mental structure of 

the target sentence. They say that NMT output 

can be very misleading and, once read, is diffi-

cult to depart from. 

Some interviewees were not able to say which 

language version they read first. They had either 

never reflected on the issue or assumed that they 

read both versions in parallel or in batches alter-

nately. 

Only one translator indicated that she read the 

NMT output as if she was revising a translation, 

whereas several stated explicitly that they do not 

read NMT output as a text to be revised. 

In the final section we discuss the benefits and 

drawbacks that the translators identified when 

using NMT. 

4.4 Advantages and risks 

Two advantages of using NMT that translators 

mention repeatedly are that it speeds up their 

work and reduces typing effort. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 20



However, the question of time gain is highly 

controversial among translators. Around half of 

the interviewees report that using NMT allows 

them to produce translations more quickly. In 

fact, for some, speed is the only advantage. Some 

add that the time gained is mitigated by a loss in 

quality: NMT allows them to produce lower 

quality more quickly. 

The other half were either unsure as to wheth-

er they work faster with NMT, saying that this 

varies greatly depending on the document, or 

suggest that NMT use might speed up translation 

but slow down revision (for revisers’ comments, 

see section 4.2). 

Nearly half report that NMT reduces typing ef-

fort. Some stress that they either cannot 

touch-type or are slow typers and benefit from 

being able to insert whole chunks into their texts. 

However, some emphasise that they prefer typ-

ing: while they are typing, they are mentally 

preparing their translation. For them, typing is 

not an additional chore to translation but integral 

into the complex cognitive process of translation. 

The perceptions of greater speed and less typ-

ing effort may be interrelated: because translators 

are doing less typing, they may feel that they are 

processing their text faster. Nevertheless, the 

claim of greater speed has not been tested. 

A very interesting set of themes that arose 

from the interviews were the perceived psycho-

logical and cognitive benefits of using NMT. A 

quarter of the interviewees said that they found it 

reassuring not to have a blank segment and to 

have to start a translation from scratch. Some 

mention that the NMT output is a source of inspi-

ration, especially when they are tired or do not 

know how to deal with a construction. Cadwell et 

al. (2016) found this to be an unusual reason for 

using MT. 

Several translators reported that they had 

sometimes been highly impressed by the elo-

quent solutions that NMT offers. 

We can only speculate as to the reasons for the 

readiness of DGT translators to embrace MT. 

One explanation may be that, as institutional 

translators, they are used to integrating transla-

tions from different sources. 

A further benefit that was mentioned is that PE 

requires less cognitive effort than translation: it is 

easier to find and correct errors in an existing 

text than to create a new text. However, by no 

means all translators share this view. Some find 

PE more cognitively demanding than translation. 

They also argue that accepting NMT solutions is 

less demanding than improving them. This drives 

translators into a passive role which may affect 

their translation skills in the long run. Cadwell et 

al. (2016) report that some DGT translators reject 

MT because of its potentially detrimental effect 

on their abilities.  

As a disadvantage of using NMT, some trans-

lators mentioned that they might tend to skim the 

NMT output, instead of reading it in the depth 

required to judge whether it correctly renders the 

meaning of the original. 

In this context, it was also claimed that PE 

was killing translators’ creativity. The word ‘cre-

ativity’ seemed to be used here in the sense of 

being able to produce a new text, a process ac-

companied by attention, focus and an active 

mindset, as opposed to a passive attitude that 

soon leads to a lack of attention. This sense of 

‘creation’ is a source of motivation for some 

translators, which they will lose if they are only 

required to ‘clean up’ a text. Herbig et al. (2019) 

emphasise the need to improve translators’ moti-

vation by appropriately addressing cognitive load 

in the PE process, in order to avoid exhaustion 

and boredom, the effects of which may lead to 

higher translation costs. 

Finally, some translators note that, in the ab-

sence of explicit expectations, the availability of 

NMT output (of ‘good enough’ quality) makes it 

possible to produce a translation with minimal 

human intervention. This constitutes a high risk 

for the quality of the product. 

5 Conclusions 

Overall, many of the translators interviewed 

consider NMT useful, but the majority have 

reservations about it in their daily work. This is 

partly because the quality of NMT output varies 

greatly from segment to segment and cannot be 

predicted reliably. Translators tend to recognise 

typical errors and see NMT as a tool that helps 

them do their work. However, many also see 

significant drawbacks and know that MT is not a 

substitute for human translation. As a result, they 

have developed working methods that 

compensate for the perceived disadvantages and 

give them ‘control’. In practice, these methods 

mean that these translators translate rather than 

post-edit. Unfortunately, some of the working 

methods create new risks. A number of errors in 

the NMT output do not seem to be effectively 

corrected in the PE/translation phase, which puts 

pressure on revisers. These phenomena need to 

be analysed for quality assurance purposes. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 21



The wide range of (sometimes conflicting) 

views among translators may not be new or 

unique to the use of NMT, but may be a result of 

reflection on new circumstances. Having to adapt 

to a new tool makes one more aware of differ-

ences that already existed and may play a more 

significant role in the future. 

References 

Cadwell, Patrick, Sharon O’Brien and Carlos S. C. 

Teixeira. 2017. Resistance and accommodation: 

factors for the (non-)adoption of machine transla-

tion among professional translators. Perspectives, 

26(3):301-321. 

Cadwell, Patrick, Sheila Castilho, Sharon O’Brien and 

Linda Mitchell. 2016. Human factors in machine 

translation and post-editing among institutional 

translators. Translation Spaces, 5(2):222-243. 

Castilho, Sheila, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari, 

Rico Sennrich, Andy Way and Panayota Geor-

gakopoulou. 2018. Evaluating MT for massive 

open online courses. Machine Translation, 

(2018)32:255-278. 

Dragsted, Barbara. 2006. Computer-aided translation 

as a distributed cognitive task. Pragmatics & Cog-

nition, 14(2):443-464. 

Drugan, Joanna, Ingemar Strandvik and Erkka Vuo-

rinen. 2018. Translation quality, quality manage-

ment and agency: principles and practice in the Eu-

ropean Union institutions. In Joss Moorkens, Shei-

la Catilho, Stephen Doherty and Federico Gaspari 

(eds.), Translation quality assessment: from princi-

ples to practice. Berlin: Springer, 39-68. 

Eisold, Andreas. 2017. Zur Rolle der Terminologie in 

der maschinellen Übersetzung. Jörg Porsiel, (ed.) 

Maschinelle Übersetzung: Grundlagen für den pro-

fessionellen Einsatz, Bundesverband der Dolmet-

scher und Übersetzer, 109-125. 

Guerberof Arenas, Ana. 2014. Correlations between 

productivity and quality when post-editing in a pro-

fessional context. Machine Translation, 

28:165-186. 

Herbig, Nico, Santanu Pal, Mihaela Vela, Antonio 

Krüger and Josef van Genabith. 2019. Multi-modal 

indicators for estimating perceived cognitive load 

in post-editing of machine translation. Machine 

Translation, (2019).  

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10590-019-09227-8  

Ive, Julia, Aurélien Max and François Yvon. 2018. 

Reassessing the proper place of man and machine 

in translation: a pre-translation scenario. Machine 

Translation, 32(4):279-308. 

Knowles, Rebecca, Marina Sanchez-Torron, and 

Philipp Koehn. 2019. A user study of neural inter-

active translation prediction. Machine Translation, 

(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10590-019-09235-

8 

Koehn, Philipp and Ulrich Germann. 2014. The im-

pact of machine translation quality on human 

post-editing. Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Work-

shop on Humans and Computer-assisted Transla-

tion, Gothenburg, Sweden. Association for Compu-

tational Linguistics, 38-46. 

Koehn, Philipp and Rebecca Knowles. 2017. Six 

challenges for neural machine translation. Proceed-

ings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine 

Translation, Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. 

28–39. 

Koponen, Maarit. 2016. Is machine translation 

post-editing worth the effort? A survey of research 

into post-editing and effort. The Journal of Special-

ised Translation, 25:131-148. 

Läubli, Samuel, Rico Sennrich, Martin Volk 2018. 

Has machine translation achieved human parity? A 

case for document-level evaluation. Proceedings of 

the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-

ural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium, 

4791–4796. 

Moorkens, Joss, Antonio Toral, Sheila Castilho and 

Andy Way. 2018. Translators’ perceptions of liter-

ary post-editing using statistical and neural ma-

chine translation. Translation Spaces 7:2, 240–262. 

Plitt, Mirko, and François Masselot. 2010. A Produc-

tivity test of statistical machine translation 

post-editing in a typical localisation context. The 

Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 

93:7-16.  

Tihanyi László and Csaba Oravecz. 2017. First exper-

iments and results in English-Hungarian neural 

machine translation. Proceedings of the 13th Con-

ference on Hungarian Computational Linguistics 

(MSZNY 2017), Szeged, Hungary, 275-286. 

Yamada, Masaru. 2019. The impact of Google Neural 

Machine Translation on post-editing by student 

translators. The Journal of Specialised Translation, 

31:87-106. 

Van Brussel, Laura, Arda Tezcan, and Lieve Macken. 

2018. A fine-grained error analysis of NMT, PBMT 

and RBMT output for English-to-Dutch. Proceed-

ings of the Eleventh International Conference on 

Language Resources and Evaluation, May, 

3799-3804.  

Way, Andy. 2018. Traditional and emerging use-cases 

for machine translation. In: Joss Moorkens, Sheila 

Castilho, Federico Gaspari, Stephen Doherty (eds.) 

Translation Quality Assessment: From principles to 

practice. Springer, Berlin, 159–178. 

 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 22


