



















































Co-Operation as an Asymmetric Form of Human-Computer Creativity. Case: Peace Machine


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for Conversational AI, pages 42–50
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

42

Co-Operation as an Asymmetric Form of Human-Computer Creativity.
Case: Peace Machine

Mika Hämäläinen
Department of Digital Humanities

University of Helsinki
mika.hamalainen@helsinki.fi

Timo Honkela
Department of Digital Humanities

University of Helsinki
timo.honkela@helsinki.fi

Abstract

This theoretical paper identifies a need for a
definition of asymmetric co-creativity where
creativity is expected from the computational
agent but not from the human user. Our
co-operative creativity framework takes into
account that the computational agent has a
message to convey in a co-operative fash-
ion, which introduces a trade-off on how cre-
ative the computer can be. The requirements
of co-operation are identified from an inter-
disciplinary point of view. We divide co-
operative creativity in message creativity, con-
textual creativity and communicative creativ-
ity. Finally these notions are applied in the
context of the Peace Machine system concept.

1 Introduction

When we say something in a language, we say it
to communicate something. Every utterance we
say has a meaning behind it, a message we want to
convey to others. This is true not only in everyday
conversation, but in any act of language use, no
matter the medium, whether it was spoken, writ-
ten, signed etc.

For computationally creative systems, exhibit-
ing linguistic creativity, expressing a message is
not a requirement. In fact, just generating a lin-
guistic realization, a surface form, is challenging
enough and is considered of a merit.

The situation becomes more difficult when mere
surface generation, i.e. producing natural lan-
guage without a message, is not enough. When
a system has to generate a creative poem that
expresses a complete message or has to make a
meaning conveying contribution to a conversation.
It is often the case that a computationally creative
system is not fully aware of the meaning its cre-
ations convey, but rather rely on people to pour
their understanding of the world into the creative
artifact and perceive creativity in it.

In this paper, we focus on co-operative creativ-
ity with the focus on dialog systems. We are not
greatly interested in purely generative dialog sys-
tems that serve more for chitchat. Instead, we fo-
cus on goal-oriented dialog systems that have a
clear message they need to convey, such as a price
or available times, and the role of computational
creativity in encapsulating their message in a cre-
ative form.

Creative behavior consisting of a human and a
computer is called co-creativity. In the following
section, we start by discussing this notion and why
it is insufficient for modelling our task. In the fol-
lowing sections, we take an interdisciplinary view
on what co-operation means and formulate a cre-
ative framework based on these notions. Finally
we show a more concrete way of using our frame-
work by applying it on the Peace Machine con-
cept.

In the field of computational creativity, work-
ing with a definition for creativity plays a cru-
cial role in evaluation of a creative system (Jor-
danous, 2012; Alnajjar and Hämäläinen, 2018).
While a myriad of more abstract level theories
on computational creativity have been elaborated
in the past (Colton, 2008; Wiggins, 2006; Colton
et al., 2011), our work aims to develop a theoreti-
cal framework to a more concrete problem of cre-
ative dialog generation.

2 Co-Creativity

In this section, we describe some of the existing
definitions of human computer co-creativity as the
co-creativity paradigm is closest to our case.

Co-creativity can be divided into four categories
as identified by Lubart (2005). The computer can
act as a nanny to a person guiding and motivat-
ing him in the creative task, where as if the com-
puter acts as a coach, it will more actively help the



43

creative person to explore new ways of thinking
by educating them about different creativity tech-
niques. In a pen-pal scenario, the computer helps
a creative individual in communicating ideas with
others. Finally, the computer can be a colleague
in which case humans and computers are in a cre-
ative dialogue taking turns in forming a creative
artefact.

Davis (2013) identifies a gap between the AI re-
search focusing on computational creativity and
HCI (human-computer interaction) research fo-
cusing on creativity support tools. He argues that
co-creativity can narrow this gap. Creativity is
seen as an emergent phenomenon from the inter-
actions of a human and a computer. The interac-
tions are collaborative and both parties influence
on each other.

In mixed initiative co-creativity (Yannakakis
et al., 2014), both the computer and a human user
take an active role in contributing to solving a
creative problem, although, not necessarily to the
same extent. This differs from turn-based collabo-
ration between the two parties and from the com-
puter being merely a supportive tool, as the both
parties are actively creative.

In a recent study outlining evaluation of co-
creativity (Karimi et al., 2018), the concept of co-
creativity is defined as an interaction involving at
least one AI agent and one human. They act based
on the creative response of the other party and their
own understanding of creativity.

The current definitions of co-creativity always
expect the presence of human creativity in addi-
tion to computational creativity or computer as-
sisted creativity. However, a co-operation setting
does not require creativity at all, and if the com-
putational agent is creative, it does not mean that
there has to be human creativity present at the
same time.

3 Co-Operation

Co-operative creativity requires the computer to
exhibit creativity in its way of communication.
However, creativity is not a requirement for the
human user. Even though dialogue itself can be
seen as an interplay between two or more parties
forming an ephemeral creative artefact of its own,
we want to clearly distinguish co-operative cre-
ativity from co-creativity. Therefore, we are not
looking at dialogue as a creative artefact but rather
how creativity can take place one-sidedly on the

level of utterances.

3.1 Communicative-Creative Trade off

The purpose of a dialogue system, whether it is
made for chitchat or to answer queries, is always to
co-operate with a human. Co-operation can thus,
in its simplest form, be contributing to the conver-
sation in a meaningful way to keep the conversa-
tion on going.

The rules of conversation are governed by lin-
guistic, cognitive and social mechanisms that have
to be followed, and they set limitations for creativ-
ity. For instance, a dialogue system for booking
movie tickets can deliver a very uncreative com-
municative answer stating just the name of the
movie and its showtime or on the other extreme
of creativity, answering by a riddle.

We argue that the co-operative nature of conver-
sation, where creativity is only expected from the
computer, not from the human, and where a certain
communicative function has to be filled in accor-
dance to higher level rules of conversation, has to
balance in between creativity and predictability.

3.2 Communication in Pragmatics

The field of pragmatics has been studying mean-
ing in its context for multiple decades. In this sec-
tion, we will explain the key pragmatic theories in
understanding conversation and meaning of utter-
ances.

Grice (1975) famously defined four maxims for
co-operative principle of communication: manner,
quality, quantity and relevance. Through these
maxims, we can identify linguistic rules that a ma-
chine should follow in order to be converse in a
co-operative fashion.

The maxim of manner means that the communi-
cation is conducted in an orderly and unambiguous
fashion. The maxim of quality refers to the truth-
fulness of the utterance. The speaker shall not say
anything he believes to be false.

If there is just enough information communi-
cated in an utterance, the maxim of quantity is fol-
lowed. This means that both communicating too
little or too much is against this maxim. The last
maxim, namely that of relevance, requires the ut-
terance to be contextually related and not off topic.

When it comes to the function of utterances, i.e.
their relation to the surrounding world, we can use
Searle’s speech acts (Searle, 1969) (cf. Nonaka,
1994; Rus et al., 2012). According to this theory,



44

all utterances are either representative, expressive,
declarative, commissive or directive.

Representative and expressive are close to each
other in a communicative function. The former
states something factual about the surrounding re-
ality outside of the speaker, where as the latter is a
statement about the internal state, such as the emo-
tion, of the speaker.

Directive speech acts are commands, i.e. their
intention is to make someone else perform an ac-
tion. Commissive speech acts have a similar func-
tion as they are promises, in their case the speaker
is the one who is going to perform the action.
Declarative speech acts are, by their definition,
supposed to change the surrounding world. An ex-
ample of such a speech act is sentencing someone
guilty of a crime.

It is important to note that the surface form of
an utterance does not dictate the speech act it is
used to perform, but rather its contextualization
plays an important role. For instance, a prayer is
an expressive speech act even though on the sur-
face it might seem as a directive speech act. This
interplay between the context and the words them-
selves opens up a great potential for creativity.

3.3 Socio-Cognitive Views

In cognitive science, the concept of scripts (cf.
Bower et al., 1979) can be used in a higher level
to explain communication. In day-to-day life, our
brains rely on heuristics when processing informa-
tion. This helps us perform tasks in a cognitively
less intensive fashion. Scripts store learned pat-
terns of behaviour and outcome of different situa-
tions. For instance, paying for groceries follows a
well defined script: stand in a line waiting for your
turn, place the items on the belt, pay and go pack-
ing. By following this script, we do not have to fig-
ure out how to pay for our groceries every time we
need to buy food. It is to be noted, though, that the
scripts vary according to geographical and cultural
areas. The script for visiting a grocery store or
bank is different, e.g., in the USA, different parts
of Europe or China.

A higher level theory of the same phenomenon
is the one presented by Goffman (1959). Accord-
ing to his view, social life is assimilated to a the-
ater play, where every participant is supposed to
play their own role. In the level of interaction, the
focus of his interest is in maintaining face. The
common goal of the interlocutors in a conversa-

tion is to maintain their own social face and those
of the other participants.

3.4 Usability and Design

When we are dealing with dialogue systems, we
cannot overlook the fact that we are inherently
dealing with a user interface. In the fields of us-
ability and design, the problem of communication
has been dealt with from the human-computer in-
teraction point of view.

A simple heuristic in usability for assessing a
user interface is to look at the mental and physi-
cal effort (cf. Komogortsev et al., 2009) required
to perform a task. For dialogue systems, physi-
cal effort can be calculated by how many queries
the user has to perform to complete a given task.
Mental effort refers to all cognitively demanding
tasks such as how much information the user has
to gather and memorize from different parts of
the interface. Thus a dialogue system listing all
the possible flights with all the details when re-
quested would have low requirement for physical
effort, but would be cognitively intensive as the
user would have to memorize every flight he finds
suitable.

Maybe a more intriguing concept in design is
that of elegance (cf. White 2011). An elegant
design communicates the intended message fully
with as little as possible. The communication in
a message can be divided in two: in denotation
and connotation. Where denotation is the pure in-
formation content of the message, connotation is
more in the way the message is communicated - in
the emotional response it evokes.

3.5 Synthesis

In the previous sections, we have dedicated much
room for describing the theories from different
disciplines that in their core, are dealing with the
very same phenomenon - communication. This
section is dedicated into putting the theories to-
gether to form an interdisciplinary framework for
a dialog system that is independent of the technical
realization or creativity at this point.

We take elegance and script as higher level con-
cepts as they are on the highest level of abstrac-
tion. Reflecting these in terms of the co-operative
principle, i.e. the maxims, we can notice that ele-
gance is closely related to the maxims of quantity
and quality. As the requirement of elegance is to
express the message as fully as possible (quality)



45

with as little as possible (quantity), an elegant ut-
terance needs to fulfill these two maxims.

Scripts are most strongly related to the maxims
of manner and relevance. As scripts give us be-
havioral patterns to follow in different situations,
they govern the manner in which we are expected
to express ourselves. The behavioral patterns also
entail what is relevant to say in which situation.

We place the usability terms on the lowest level
in our synthesized model of co-operation, as they
are meant to assess a concrete human-computer in-
teraction scenario. Physical effort is linked mostly
to the maxims of quantity and relevance. A dia-
logue system providing too little information will
force the user to ask for more details, which in-
creases the amount of physical effort. This is true
also in the case of non-relevant information, which
provokes more queries by the user to reach to a rel-
evant answer.

The maxim of quantity relates to mental effort
as well. Too much information will force the user
to store it in his memory, which increases the men-
tal effort. Another maxim affecting on mental ef-
fort is that of manner. If the information is not
presented in an orderly manner, it makes it more
difficult for the user to gather the important bits of
information into a cohesive whole.

Coming back to the highest level concepts, el-
egance and script, a bridge needs to be built to
connect them. We argue that they are connected
through the context in which the conversation
takes place. The context triggers a script, but it
also changes the meaning of what is elegant. Talk-
ing with a person who knows a great deal about
the topic of the conversation requires less words to
communicate the message whereas more explain-
ing is in order for a person new to the topic.

The context is also dictated by the role one is
expected to play in the social situation. Therefore
Goffman’s theory is a part of the contextual bridge
linking the two highest level concepts. We also in-
troduce a mental model of the interlocutor as a part
of the context as it has been proven evident by the
previous discussion, that the maxims depend on
the interlocutor as well. Furthermore, the conver-
sation develops in time, which means that the prior
utterances are also building the current context.

Now that we have synthesized what co-
operative conversation requires, it is time to add
the remaining notions into the model. No conver-
sation can take place meaningfully if there is no

message to be conveyed by the words of an utter-
ance. This message can be divided into its deno-
tative and connotative function. How the message
can be conveyed is limited by the speech acts, and
they function as a gate to the conversation.

Figure 1: Model of co-operation

Figure 1 depicts the model described in this sec-
tion. This model does not take creativity into ac-
count, but rather describes the requirements of co-
operation and their inter-dependencies. The con-
text is connected back into the message compo-
nent as it affects on the next utterance of the con-
versation.

4 Co-Operative Creativity

In the previous section, we identified three main
components of a co-operative dialogue system:
message (including speech acts), context and co-
operation , which correspond to message, contex-
tual and communicative creativity respectively. In
this section, we shed light into how computational
creativity can manifest itself without jeopardizing
the strict requirement of co-operation.

4.1 Message Creativity

In a co-operative setting, there is a limitation to
what can be communicated so that it is still rele-
vant for the conversation. The limitation can be
very strict like in the case of a dialogue system
selling tickets or lenient as in the case of chitchat.

4.1.1 Creativity in Denotation
Even if the set of possible denotations was lim-
ited, there is room for creativity in finding some-
thing else to communicate that is still co-operative.
For example, glass is half full and glass is half
empty communicate about the same phenomenon,
yet their denotations are different. Thus, finding
a creative point of view to communicate about the



46

same phenomenon is a way of altering the deno-
tation of the message without making it non-co-
operative.

In a more lenient setting, the context of the mes-
sage can be explored to find a way to communi-
cate a denotation that still contributes to the co-
operativity. This could, for instance, be a change
of topic or a message provoking an emotional
change such as a joke.

4.1.2 Creativity in Connotation

Even if the denotation of a message was fully
fixed, for example, if the system has to commu-
nicate the price of a movie ticket and cannot com-
municate any other denotation to avoid risking co-
operativity, connotation opens up more room for
creativity.

Connotation can be altered as easily as by the
choice of words or by a structural change. Con-
sider for example the following sentences An ap-
pointment for vaccination has been reserved for
Monday and You will get your shot on Monday.
Both of them communicate the same denotation,
but their connotation is different. The first sen-
tence sounds more official and establishes social
distance where as the latter is more casual in style.

4.1.3 Exploiting Speech Acts

Speech acts are more abstract in nature than any
linguistic form, and thus speech acts themselves
do not offer much room for creativity. However,
understanding that certain surface realizations are
most closely attached to certain speech acts, opens
up a window for creativity.

I like strawberries is seemingly an expressive
speech act; the person tries to communicate about
his liking of strawberries. However, the actual
speech act might be directive give me strawberries
or commissive I will buy strawberries, depending
on the context. Therefore mixing and matching
speech acts with non-typical surface forms that
still communicate the message is an exploitable
possibility of computational creativity.

4.2 Contextual Creativity

The context has a huge effect on how communi-
cated messages are understood. As we have seen
throughout this paper, words can mean different
things in different contexts. A context also sets
limits to what can be said and how it should be
said.

4.2.1 User Adaptation
Knowing the user and establishing trust with him
gives more freedom for creative behavior. Even
in tightly scripted situations, if the user is known
well, the communication can deviate more from
the script without it damaging the co-operation.

A semantic model that has been learned from
the user in question could be used to creatively
adapt a message to the user’s own vocabulary. If
for example the user hates frozen yogurt a flight
connection with tediously long layovers could be
communicated as a frozen yogurt route.

A creatively expressed message has a higher
risk to not being understood. A good user model
can then provide a way of assessing whether a cre-
ative communication solution will be understood
as intended or not.

4.2.2 Role Identification
If we look at communication from the perspec-
tive of role-taking, a great source of creativity
can come from identifying the possible roles sup-
ported by the context and picking the one that
gives the greatest freedom in expression.

Role identification from user perspective, espe-
cially if there are many human users, can con-
tribute to the creative freedom. If there are more
than one possible roles the users can take, chang-
ing their role to one that offers more freedom of
creativity can be of a benefit. The roles can be
changed by communicative means.

4.2.3 Time Perspective
Planning the flow of the conversation ahead doing
constant predictions is a potential way of shifting
the context towards one that has more room for
creativity. The planning itself can also be a cre-
ative process where the conversation will take un-
expected turns that still contribute to co-operation.

Just as much as predicting the future can be a
creative process, knowing the past can be used
creatively as well. This is not limited to creative
comebacks to what the user has said, but also can
mean re-interpretation of what has been said be-
fore. Language is ambiguous and this fact can be
celebrated by reusing bits of the conversation form
the past in the new current context.

4.3 Communicative Creativity

The co-operation section in Figure 1 is probably
the part that limits creativity the most. Maxims
and the other components they relate to set rules



47

to how one is supposed to communicate in order
to do it in a co-operative fashion. However, there
is room for creativity even with these tight rules.

4.3.1 Script Selection
In a conversation situation, there might be multi-
ple social scripts to choose from. Picking a non-
typical, but yet contextually fitting script can make
it possible to find new creative solutions in the
conversation.

As scripts are not predefined hand-written rules,
but rather learned behavioral patterns, scripts offer
flexibility in changing them. Identifying how to
change a script, or how to go outside of one, in
a way that it does not startle the interlocutor, is a
task requiring creativity.

4.3.2 Adjustment of Elegance
Optimizing for elegance is probably too limiting
for creativity and not an interesting way to go
about creativity in conversation. The question
should be what is elegant enough, and what is ex-
pected to be communicated. A longer message
might be seen inelegant as it uses too many words
to communicate a message, if we are only inter-
ested in the denotation. However, the additional
length might contribute to connotation.

Making justified statements about elegance re-
quires a definition of what is communicated, the
message itself. This tells what is expected to be
communicated, which then in its turn, makes it
possible to assess the elegance of the utterance.

4.3.3 Informed Deviation from Maxims
Maxims are a part of co-operative principle and
thus by definition they are tailored towards co-
operative conversation. However, they are highly
contextual and therefore what is enough, relevant
and so on is a matter of the context in which an
utterance occurs.

A system seeking to deviate from the maxims
and still maintain co-operativity in the communi-
cation needs to be able to assess the effect of such
a deviation in a reasoned way. For example, if the
goal is to make the user think and ask questions,
communicating a bit too little or increasing ambi-
guity might be useful.

A seemingly irrelevant communication can be
useful if the communication is later contextual-
ized and made relevant for the initial conversation
topic. Sometimes telling anecdotes or giving anal-
ogous examples might seem irrelevant to the in-

terlocutor, but later in the conversation they can
prove to be helpful in understanding the problem
from another perspective.

The maxim of quality relates to truthfulness of
the utterance. Expressing something that is clearly
untrue can be a way of expressing the opposite
meaning in a sarcastic fashion (cf. Hämäläinen,
2016). If the sarcasm is understood correctly
by the user, the communication can still be co-
operative, even though on the surface it appears
to be insincere.

5 The Context of Peace Machine

Peace Machine (Honkela, 2017) is a concept on
how to use different parts of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) to promote peaceful conditions in the world.
This highly ambitious objective may sound unre-
alistic at first. It is to be remembered, though,
that the range of AI technologies that have con-
siderable impact in various domains is wide and
increasing.

The Peace Machine concept consists of three
main areas. The question is not about one sys-
tem but a number of different applications and sys-
tems. The three main areas considered are (1) Im-
proved communication, (2) Understanding emo-
tions, and (3) Improving societal conditions.

5.1 Co-Operative Creativity in Peace
Machine

In the following, the Peace Machine concept is
considered from the point of view of Co-Operative
Creativity defined and described in this paper.
Peace Machine serves as a general application
context for the theoretical work presented in this
paper and its components can be studies in the
communicative framework presented in this paper.

5.2 Message Creativity

The objective of Peace Machine is to help the user
of a component of the system use and learn com-
municative acts that help him navigate in the con-
versational space in a peaceful and constructive
manner or understand one’s own or others’ emo-
tions in a constructive way. To be successful in this
task, the system must be able to express itself in a
creative manner when necessary. The user may
need help in seeing matters from a novel point of
view or in understanding the current situation be-
yond the limits of the conceptual system that he
may have available. This help may be reached, for



48

instance, with the use of metaphor.

5.2.1 Creativity in Denotation
The topic of conversation may be guided into areas
in which, for instance, the risk of emotional out-
bursts are lowered. The creativity of the system
would lie in the ability to guide the topics of the
conversation even when the overall communica-
tive goal remains the same. One opportunity is to
find a path in the conversation that minimizes un-
intended choice of topics or expressions that might
endanger the overall goal. It is known from prac-
tical experience in peace negotiations that the use
of a poorly chosen single word or theme may jeop-
ardize the whole process. Here it is to be remem-
bered that Peace Machine is not focusing on peace
negotiations between nations or other such organi-
zations but between any two or more people.

5.2.2 Creativity in Connotation
In Peace Machine, consideration of the connota-
tion is very important. When the aim is to reach
peaceful and constructive communication, expres-
sions that have negative connotations should be
avoided. In a conversation between two people,
the system may help the persons to avoid expres-
sions that hurt other’s emotions or the ground of
his identity. In many cultures it is important to
take social aspects into account. Depending on the
relationship between the people, their status and
cultural background, the expressions that are ap-
propriate in one situation may be quite the oppo-
site in another. For instance, the same content can
be expressed in two quite different ways regarding
the style: Let’s have a meeting tomorrow! or May
I have the honor to ask your presence in meeting
in the near future, potentially already tomorrow?.

5.2.3 Exploiting Speech Acts
Useful computational creativity that helps peo-
ple through potentially problematic communica-
tion can take place through suitable choices re-
garding speech acts. In a homely context, there
is a clear difference between the expressions Take
out the trash bin and The trash bin is quite smelly.
The intention can be considered to be the same
in both cases but the emotional outcome may be
quite different. Whether illocutionary, perlocu-
tionary, propositional or utterance act should be
chosen depends on multiple factors that concern
the persons involved, their background, history of
the communication and the broader context. At

the present moment, it is still difficult to take into
account the non-linguistic context in human-like
manner. It is, however, good to keep in mind that
persons may interpret the non-linguist or implicit
context in a different way especially if they, for in-
stance, have different education or cultural back-
ground (cf. Anderson and Shifrin, 2017).

5.3 Contextual Creativity

In Peace Machine, as in any general purpose sys-
tem, the challenge of world knowledge and the
huge complexity of the contexts that a system may
encounter is a great challenge as well as an oppor-
tunity. This could be an indirect or direct access
to the context. Here indirect refers to the use of
language and the direct refers to use of perceptual
senses. The underlying matters have been a sub-
ject to philosophical debates for very long time (cf.
Gärdenfors, 2000; Von Foerster, 2007; Bundgaard,
2010) and it is not possible to cover this theme
here. From the point of view of Peace Machine,
the room for computational creativity is extensive
and given broad range of opportunities. In build-
ing peace one possible approach is to choose the
topics and dimensions suitably. For instance, the
choice can help the discussants feel safe and se-
cure. A useful notion is the division into fore-
ground and background that is used in cognitive
linguistics (Langacker, 2008). Sometimes it may
be useful and constructive to start conversational
from the background and gradually proceed into
the foreground. The creative system may help hu-
mans in finding such conversational routes.

5.3.1 User Adaptation
In the above discussion referring to context, the
aspect of subjectivity was briefly brought up. In
addition to their experiences, values, preferences
and identity, people are also different regarding
their linguistic and conceptual systems. We do
not know the same set of words and their mean-
ings and we even have different interpretations of
words and expressions. The words ”fair” or ”beau-
tiful” refer to different things, which should be ob-
vious, but more difficult to measure than compar-
ing the limits or distributions of interpretation of
color ”orange” or whether some product is ”ex-
pensive”. In Peace Machine, this theme is very
important as it has been pointed out that misunder-
standing is a very common phenomenon that has
wide practical consequences. Creative user adap-
tation on language and conceptual systems is pre-



49

sented as a potentially important means to serve
a basis for highly improved communication. This
is a hypotheses that needs to be tested in various
kinds of settings.

5.3.2 Role Identification
A machine, the purpose of which is to help peo-
ple understand one another, can take up different
roles in a communicative setting. In a situation of
conflict, a suitable role might be that of a medi-
ator while some situations require a more active
leader-like role from the machine. This gives the
machine a spectrum of roles from the passive to
active to choose from.

5.3.3 Time Perspective
Helping people understand one another is a task
with a persuasive goal. This persuasion requires
planning, and the creative outcomes of the flow of
the conversation have to be taken into account by
the system.

With an aim for peace, Peace Machine should
be able to take turns in the conversation that get
the interlocutor off guard. In an extremely polar-
ized setting, the two opposing parties are biased
towards not being open towards the other party’s
opinions. A persuasion technique such as this one
requires creative planning.

5.4 Communicative Creativity for Peace
Machine

In the following, we consider how to communicate
in a co-operative fashion while using the Peace
Machine system.

5.4.1 Script Selection
Useful scripts to promote mutual understanding
and respect can be learned based on large corpora
of conversations. The real world variety of con-
texts makes its useful to apply creative solutions
when the corpus-based solution does not provide
close enough solution. Two or more solutions may
be merged.

5.4.2 Adjustment of Elegance
Elegance is seemingly an important criterion re-
garding Peace Machine. The system should com-
municate in such a manner that it matches with
the user’s linguistic expectations and situation-
specific needs. Too short and ambiguous mes-
sage may be considered impolite or rude. Equally
well, a message too long may be considered unin-
teresting or impolite. The Peace Machine system

component can be used to train a person to han-
dle potentially troublesome situations, during the
conversation with someone else, or to help by an-
alyzing an earlier conversation.

5.4.3 Informed Deviation from Maxims
From the point of view of the Peace Machine con-
cept and system use, among the Grice’s (1975)
four maxims for co-operative principle of commu-
nication, manner, quality, quantity and relevance,
can be used to judge potential usefulness of break-
ing these rules in a creative way. Regarding man-
ner, the system may guide a person to be unclear
or ambiguous in order to give room for alternative
helpful interpretations or ideas, or to point out that
the terminology and conceptual space may be such
that meaning negotiation would be useful regard-
ing the conversational situation at hand. The initial
problem may help in understanding that the basis
is not the same regarding the meaning of some key
term in the conversation.

Changing the topic in the middle of a conversa-
tion and not being relevant may be a means to cre-
ate a possibility to escape a problematic conver-
sational situation. This approach should be used
with care because it may lead into unintended con-
sequences. For instance, the expression may be
interpreted as an insult rather than as, for instance,
humorous break to a heated discussion.

6 Conclusions

This paper has identified a need for theoretical
framework for asymmetric human-computer cre-
ativity, where, for the first time, the computer is
the only party with a requirement for creativity.
Thus our initial framework fills a theoretical void
in the field.

In this paper we have outlined from an interdis-
ciplinary point of view what the requirements are
for a co-operative conversation. Based on this def-
inition, we have identified three different kinds of
creativity in a co-operative setting: message, con-
textual and conversational creativity.

Furthermore, we have highlighted the impor-
tance of having a message to convey creatively.
This makes a clear distinction with the creative
systems that generate language without a need to
communicate a certain idea, a message. Due to
the nature of dialogue systems that are meant to
aid users reach their goal, this need for a message
cannot be ignored.



50

References
Khalid Alnajjar and Mika Hämäläinen. 2018. A

Master-Apprentice Approach to Automatic Creation
of Culturally Satirical Movie Titles. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th International Conference on Natural
Language Generation (INLG), pages 274––283.

Richard C Anderson and Zohara Shifrin. 2017. The
meaning of words in context. In Theoretical issues
in reading comprehension, pages 331–348. Rout-
ledge.

Gordon H Bower, John B Black, and Terrence J Turner.
1979. Scripts in memory for text. Cognitive Psy-
chology, 11(2):177 – 220.

Peer F Bundgaard. 2010. Husserl and language. In
Handbook of phenomenology and cognitive science,
pages 368–399. Springer.

Simon Colton. 2008. Creativity Versus the Percep-
tion of Creativity in Computational Systems. In
AAAI Spring Symposium: Creative Intelligent Sys-
tems, Technical Report SS-08-03, pages 14—-20,
Stanford, California, USA.

Simon Colton, John William Charnley, and Alison
Pease. 2011. Computational creativity theory: The
face and idea descriptive models. In ICCC, pages
90–95.

Nicholas Davis. 2013. Human-computer co-creativity:
Blending human and computational creativity. In
Ninth Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital
Entertainment Conference.

Erving Goffman. 1959. The Presentation of Self in
Everyday Life. University of Edinburgh Social Sci-
ences Research Centre.

H Paul Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. 1975,
pages 41–58.

Peter Gärdenfors. 2000. Conceptual Spaces: The Ge-
ometry of Thought. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

Mika Hämäläinen. 2016. Reconocimiento au-
tomático del sarcasmo - ¡Esto va a funcionar bien!
Master’s thesis, University of Helsinki, Finland.
URN:NBN:fi:hulib-201606011945.

Timo Honkela. 2017. Rauhankone. Tekoälytutkijan
testamentti. Gaudeamus.

Anna Jordanous. 2012. A standardised procedure for
evaluating creative systems: Computational creativ-
ity evaluation based on what it is to be creative. Cog-
nitive Computation, 4(3):246–279.

Pegah Karimi, Kazjon Grace, Mary Lou Maher, and
Nicholas Davis. 2018. Evaluating creativity in com-
putational co-creative systems. In The Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Computa-
tional Creativity, ICCC.

O Komogortsev, Carl J Mueller, Dan Tamir, and Liam
Feldman. 2009. An effort based model of software
usability. In 2009 International Conference on Soft-
ware Engineering Theory and Practice (SETP-09).

Ronald Langacker. 2008. Cognitive grammar: A basic
introduction. OUP USA.

Todd Lubart. 2005. How can computers be partners
in the creative process: Classification and commen-
tary on the special issue. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 63(4):365 – 369. Com-
puter support for creativity.

Ikujiro Nonaka. 1994. A dynamic theory of organi-
zational knowledge creation. Organization science,
5(1):14–37.

Vasile Rus, Cristian Moldovan, Nobal Niraula, and
Arthur C Graesser. 2012. Automated discovery of
speech act categories in educational games. Inter-
national Educational Data Mining Society.

John Rogers Searle. 1969. Speech acts: An essay in
the philosophy of language. Cambridge university
press.

Heinz Von Foerster. 2007. Understanding understand-
ing: Essays on cybernetics and cognition. Springer
Science & Business Media.

Alex W White. 2011. The Elements of Graphic Design.
Allworth Press.

Geraint A Wiggins. 2006. A preliminary framework
for description, analysis and comparison of creative
systems. Knowledge-Based Systems, 19(7):449–
458.

Georgios N Yannakakis, Antonios Liapis, and Con-
stantine Alexopoulos. 2014. Mixed-initiative co-
creativity. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference on
the Foundations of Digital Games.

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(79)90009-4
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/Symposia/Spring/2008/SS-08-03/SS08-03-003.pdf
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/Symposia/Spring/2008/SS-08-03/SS08-03-003.pdf
http://hdl.handle.net/10138/163231
http://hdl.handle.net/10138/163231
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-012-9156-1
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-012-9156-1
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-012-9156-1
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.002
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.002
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.002

