



















































Identification, Interpretability, and Bayesian Word Embeddings


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Natural Language Processing and Computational Social Science, pages 7–17
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 6, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

7

Identification, Interpretability, and Bayesian Word Embeddings

Adam M. Lauretig
Department of Political Science

Ohio State University
Columbus, OH

lauretig.1@osu.edu

Abstract
Social scientists have recently turned to ana-
lyzing text using tools from natural language
processing like word embeddings to mea-
sure concepts like ideology, bias, and affinity.
However, word embeddings are difficult to use
in the regression framework familiar to social
scientists: embeddings are are neither identi-
fied, nor directly interpretable. I offer two ad-
vances on standard embedding models to rem-
edy these problems. First, I develop Bayesian
Word Embeddings with Automatic Relevance
Determination priors, relaxing the assump-
tion that all embedding dimensions have equal
weight. Second, I apply work identifying la-
tent variable models to anchor the dimensions
of the resulting embeddings, identifying them,
and making them interpretable and usable in a
regression. I then apply this model and anchor-
ing approach to two cases, the shift in interna-
tionalist rhetoric in the American presidents’
inaugural addresses, and the relationship be-
tween bellicosity in American foreign policy
decision-makers’ deliberations. I find that in-
augural addresses became less international-
ist after 1945, which goes against the conven-
tional wisdom, and that an increase in bellicos-
ity is associated with an increase in hostile ac-
tions by the United States, showing that elite
deliberations are not cheap talk, and helping
confirm the validity of the model.

1 Introduction

Important questions in the social sciences turn on
the meanings of words used to express ideas like
language change, emotion, and ideological affin-
ity (Hamilton et al., 2016; Rheault et al., 2016;
Pomeroy et al., 2018). One increasingly popular
way to represent meaning, originating in natural
language processing, is through the use of word
embeddings. This class of models learns a set of
coefficients which encode meaning by predicting a
word given the surrounding words (Mikolov et al.,

2013a,b). These coefficients are the embeddings,
which can then be used to analyze word meanings.

Unfortunately, existing embedding models are
not always appropriate for answering social sci-
entists’ questions. Embeddings are not identified,
and the dimensions are not directly interpretable,
which makes it difficult to perform statistical in-
ference on the embeddings produced by standard
models, for example, using them as covariates in a
regression model.1

To resolve these issues, I cast word embed-
dings as a Bayesian latent variable model. Iden-
tifying multidimensional latent variable models
is a known problem, and I draw on solutions
proposed in the ideal point modeling literature
(Rivers, 2003; Clinton et al., 2004) to render em-
beddings interpretable and usable in a regression
framework. I demonstrate these results on two cor-
pora: a collection of inaugural addresses, and a se-
lection of declassified diplomatic documents from
the Foreign Relation of the United States. In the
inaugural addresses, I find rhetoric became more
domestically-focused after 1945, a shift which
existing social science approaches cannot detect.
This finding stands in contrast to what existing the-
ories of international relations would have us ex-
pect. In the FRUS documents, I find that more bel-
licose rhetoric results in more aggressive Ameri-
can foreign policy behavior, helping confirm that
elite deliberation matters for shaping foreign pol-
icy, and that the measurements I create correlate
with existing datasets, helping to establish the va-
lidity of the model results.

1This is because in a regression setup, the coefficient is
the change in the dependent variable for a 1-unit increase in
the independent variable. With embedding dimensions, it is
not clear what a 1-unit increase in the independent variable
means, nor does direction have any clear meaning.



8

2 Social Science and Embedding Models
of Language

Traditional approaches to creating variables from
text in the social sciences involve human coders,
who assign documents to categories based on pre-
defined criteria. However, this approach is ex-
pensive, and does not scale. Text as data tech-
niques attempt to solve this problem through the
use of natural language processing techniques to
convert a corpus of text into numeric objects which
makes inference possible (Grimmer and Stewart,
2013; Gentzkow et al., 2017). These techniques
allow scholars to create variables and operational-
ize concepts in corpora that are too large for hu-
man coding, and investigate ideas which cannot
be measured directly (unlike indicators like Gross
Domestic Product or population).

While a variety of models have been proposed
to create variables from political text, including
scaling models (Lowe et al., 2011), and topic mod-
els (Blei et al., 2003; Grimmer, 2010; Roberts
et al., 2016), these approaches focus on the doc-
ument as the unit of analysis. Word embed-
dings, which have a long history in the natural lan-
guage processing literature (see Turney and Pantel
(2010) for an extensive review of pre-neural net-
work models), have recently been embraced by
social scientists for their potential for inference at
the word level. Modern neural word embedding
models learn a low-dimensional representation of
a word as a dense vector by either factorizing a
word co-occurrence matrix or predicting the co-
occurrence of a pair of words using a single-layer
neural network. Among the best known of these
models is word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013a,b),
which proposed an efficient model for learning
embeddings, framing embedding learning as a
prediction task, rather than a factorization task.

For social scientists, word embeddings are a
powerful tool because they can represent the
meanings of individual words. Embeddings can
help isolate patterns in corpora that are expen-
sive to label, and make apparent latent phenomena
not observable through simple document-feature
counts such as patterns of semantic change,
(Hamilton et al., 2016), cultural assumptions and
biases (Caliskan et al., 2017; Kozlowski et al.,
2018; Garg et al., 2018), and ideological affinity in
international organizations (Pomeroy et al., 2018).

However, these embeddings can be problematic
for social science research, where scholars care

about both model identification and interpretable
results. Embeddings are multidimensional latent
variable models, which are not, by default, iden-
tified: a known problem with this class of model,
where multiple permutations of latent dimensions
can result in the same observed data (Rivers, 2003;
Clinton et al., 2004; Aldrich et al., 2014). How-
ever, by anchoring points on these dimensions, it
is possible to present identified and interpretable
dimensions. In the ideal-point literature, these an-
chors represent ideological “endpoints,” with the-
ory guiding the selection of which legislators are
most liberal and conservative. Choosing words as
anchors with a large number of dimensions is more
difficult than choosing legislators, however, I offer
a solution below.

There have been multiple efforts at developing
Bayesian word embeddings (Rudolph et al., 2016;
Barkan, 2017; Ji et al., 2017; Havrylov and Titov,
2018), however, none of these have exploited the
key advantage of Bayesian inference: the abil-
ity to quantify the uncertainty in parameter esti-
mates, and use prior information to inform param-
eter estimates. The one approach that has incor-
porated both uncertainty and hypothesis testing is
Han et al. (2018), who offer both measures of un-
certainty, and a way to test the effect of metadata
on the similarity of embeddings, however, this ap-
proach does not account for identification prob-
lems in the learned embeddings.

3 Bayesian Word Embeddings

In this section, I develop word embeddings
as Bayesian latent variable models estimated
with variational inference, following similar work
for probabilistic principal components analysis
(Bishop, 1999) and ideal-point models (Imai et al.,
2016). I first discuss the embedding model setup,
add Automatic Relevance Determination priors to
the model, and then, present the variational up-
dates to estimate the model.

Word embeddings predict the probability of a
word-context pair co-occurring, and because the
co-occurrence is a binary variable (Yij = 1 if
wi and wj co-occur, 0 otherwise), I use a pro-
bit link function to model the probability of co-
occurrence.

p(Yij = 1) =

(111[zij > 0]111[yij = 1] + 111[zij < 0]111[yij = 0])

T N (zij |xxx>i βββj , 1).
(1)



9

XXX and βββ are K × I (or K × J , respectively) -
dimensional matrices, YYY is an I×J co-occurrence
matrix, the corpus contains I words and J context
words. Each embedding vector (xxxi or βββj) has a
K-dimensional multivariate normal prior.

Most existing approaches to word embeddings
contain no measures of uncertainty, or the covari-
ance between dimensions. This can be a problem
during estimation, as the model attempts to put
equal weight on all dimensions. To resolve this,
I use Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD)
priors, which place a separate gamma-distributed
scalar (e.g. αXk ) on the diagonal for each dimen-
sion of the covariance matrix (MacKay and Neal,
1994; Bishop, 1999). These priors penalize unnec-
essary model dimensions, improving model fit.

This specification results in the following like-
lihood:

p(ZZZ,XXX,βββ,αααX,αααβ |Y) ∝
(111[zij > 0]111[yij = 1] + 111[zij < 0]111[yij = 0])

T N (zij |xxx>i βββj , 1)×∏
i

MVN (xxxi|0,ααα−1X )×∏
i

MVN (βββj |0,ααα−1β )×∏
k

Gam(αXk |cX0 , dX0)×∏
k

Gam(αβk |cβ0 , dβ0).

(2)

For Bayesian models like this, the goal is to esti-
mate posterior distributions of the parameters most
likely to have produced the observed data. Given
the joint density (probability of data and parame-
ters), we want to calculate the conditional density
of the parameters by evaluating the following in-
tegral (notation follows Bishop (1999)):

P (YYY ) =

∫
p(YYY ,θθθ)dθθθ (3)

where θθθ = {ZZZ,XXX,βββ,αααX ,αααβ}. This integral is an-
alytically intractable, so we transform the integral
using Jensen’s inequality:

lnP (YYY ) = ln
∫
p(YYY ,θθθ)dθθθ

= ln
∫
Q(θθθ)P (Y

YY ,θθθ)

Q(θθθ)
dθθθ

≥
∫
Q(θθθ)lnP (Y

YY ,θθθ)

Q(θθθ)
dθθθ

= L(Q)

(4)

where L(Q) is evidence lower bound (ELBO).
The difference between the true model P (Y )

and variational approximation L(Q) can be rep-
resented is the Kullbeck-Leibler divergence:

KL(Q||P ) = −
∫
Q(θθθ)lnP (Y |θ

θθ)

Q(θθθ)
dθθθ (5)

so we turn to a mean-field variational approx-
imation to estimate the model, minimizing the
Kullbeck-Leibler divergence (Wainwright and Jor-
dan, 2008; Blei et al., 2017). This requires assum-
ing that the approximation to the posterior can be
factorized:

Q(ZZZ,XXX,βββ,αααX ,αααβ) =
Q(ZZZ),Q(XXX),Q(βββ),Q(αααX),Q(αααβ)

(6)

and that appropriate approximating distributions
can be found. In this case, the requirement is
met: zij is approximated with a truncated nor-
mal, xxxi and βββj are approximated with multivari-
ate normals, and αXk and αβk are approximated
with gamma distributions. This factorization and
approximation can be further factorized into the
following parameter updates:

z∗ij = E[xxx>i ]E[βββj ]

E[q(zij)] =

z
∗
ij +

φ(z∗ij)

Φ(z∗ij)
if yij = 1

z∗ij −
φ(z∗ij)

1−Φ(z∗ij)
if yij = 0

AAA =

diag(E[αααX ])−1 +∑
j

E[βββjβββ>j ]


aaai =

∑
j

E[βββj ]E[zij ]

E[q(xxxi)] = AAA−1aaai

BBB =

(
diag(E[αααβ ])−1 +

∑
i

E[xxxixxx>i ]

)
bbbj =

∑
i

E[xxxi]E[zij ]

E[q(βββj ]) = BBB−1bbbj

cx = cx0 +
I

2

dxk = dx0 +
||E[xxxk]||2

2

E[q(αXk)] =
cx
dxk

cβ = cβ0 +
J

2

dβk = dβ0 +
||E[βββk]||2

2

E[q(αβk)] =
cβ
dβk

(7)



10

where cx0 , dx0 , cβ0 , dβ0 are hyperparameters set
by the user. Convergence is monitored via change
in the ELBO, and when change drops below a
user-specified threshold, the model is considered
converged. This model is implemented in the R
package bwe.2

4 Identifying Model Output

The output from multidimensional latent variable
models is not identified, as many possible permu-
tations of latent values can produce the same ob-
served data (Rivers, 2003). However, by fixing
K(K + 1) linearly independent values (anchors),
users can guarantee the embedding matrix is iden-
tified (Rivers, 2003; Clinton et al., 2004; Bafumi
et al., 2005). To determine these anchors in the
ideal point modeling literature, theory drives the
endpoint selection: Clinton et al. (2004) fix both
points for Jesse Helms, Ted Kennedy, and Lincoln
Chaffee as right, left, and center anchors, respec-
tively, in a K = 2 model.

While theory should always motivate modeling
choices, determining theoretically motivated an-
chors when K ranges from 50 to 300 can be dif-
ficult. I propose a solution: theory can motivate
initial anchor selection, and then, for each addi-
tional anchor, the most cosine dis-similar word is
chosen as the opposite anchor. This allows the an-
alyst to specify theoretically motivated opposites
as initial anchors, and then, resulting anchors are
chosen from remaining words. I provide an imple-
mentation of this algorithm in the R package bwe.

5 Interpreting Model Output

Anchoring the embeddings ensures they are iden-
tified, however, they are still not in a format which
allows for ready interpretability in the regression-
based models social scientists are most familiar
with. To transform embeddings so that they can
be used in regression, I opt for a modification of
the anchoring approach discussed above. For this
approach, the user specifies a pair of endpoints for
a dimension, where the endpoints of interest are
set to 1 and −1. This can be applied to as many
dimensions as necessary, and then the automatic,
cosine-based anchoring is used for the rest of the
dimensions. An affine transformation is then used
to transform the embedding matrix relative to the
chosen anchors.

2https://github.com/adamlauretig/bwe.

A key advantage of this approach is that because
two anchors are supplied, words are scaled on this
dimension. For example, while simply choosing
“war” as an anchor results in the results words
scaled according to their similarity with “war”,
setting “war” and “peace” as opposite anchors (1
and −1, respectively) allows for a measure of bel-
licosity in a corpus.

This method can be applied to as many
words/concepts as the user is interested in (as the
automated cosine similarity will handle the other
dimensions), and, of note for social scientists, each
of these word scalings, which are I × 1, can be
multiplied by a D × I document-term matrix:
D × I ∗ I × 1, scaling the documents in a corpus
according to dimensions of interest. These docu-
ment values can then we used in a regression, and
the coefficients can be interpreted in a straightfor-
ward way.

6 Inaugurals and Internationalism

In an initial test of this model, I investigate
whether the United States saw itself in a new,
global role after 1945, as perceived in presi-
dents’ inaugural addresses. After 1945, the United
States was the global hegemon, and international
relations theory argues that this resulted in a
shift in American attitudes towards the world
(Mearsheimer, 2001). It has been shown that the
public takes elite cues on various issues (Zaller,
1992; Druckman and Jacobs, 2015), and since
foreign-policy is generally viewed as an elite-
led phenomenon (Aldrich et al., 2006), I explore
whether, after the second World War, inaugural
addresses were more internationally focused than
those before the war.

I use the corpus of inaugural addresses avail-
able in the quanteda R package (Benoit et al.,
2018), which contains 58 speeches. I keep words
which occur with frequency > 5, and then low-
ercase and tokenize the texts, resulting in 2705
words. I estimate the model with a context win-
dow of 9, with 5 negative samples for every pos-
itive sample, and and the number of dimensions
K = 50. After fitting the model, I compare
three possible anchorings: an un-anchored embed-
ding, an embedding anchored on “american,” and
an embedding scaled with the first dimension an-
chored on “international” and “domestic;” the re-
sults are visible in Table 1. We see that chang-
ing the anchoring points changes the most simi-

https://github.com/adamlauretig/bwe


11

lar words, however, anchoring helps make these
embeddings more interpretable. To test whether
there was a statistically significant difference be-
tween American perceptions of global roles before
and after 1945, I multiply the document-term ma-
trix by the embedding dimension anchored on “in-
ternational” and “domestic,” creating an “interna-
tionalism” scale for documents. I test this hypoth-
esis using a one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test,
and reject the null hypothesis, that pre-1945 in-
augural addresses are less internationalist than the
post-1945 addresses at p < .05. This means pre-
1945 addresses are more “internationalist” than
the post-1945 addresses. I plot the differing dis-
tributions in Figure 1.

What explains this finding? One possibility,
building on Herring (2008, ch. 1), is that the
United States was not isolationist prior to 1945,
that isolationism was largely a product of the
1920s and 1930s, however, the United States was
more unilateral before 1945. Because the multi-
lateral world order was a fact of life after 1945,
it is possible presidents were less likely to com-
ment on international affairs, international action
was the norm, rather than the exception. Further-
more, the public played a larger role in shaping
foreign policy action, particularly during the Viet-
nam War era, than it had previously (Aldrich et al.,
2006), and this could lead to a blurring of the lines
between foreign and domestic politics when pres-
idents address the public.

I compare the results from Bayesian Word Em-
beddings to the results from a standard model used
in the social sciences to analyze text, the struc-
tural topic model (Roberts et al., 2016)3. I find
that “domestic” and “international” topics are not
linked, the structural topic model captures no re-
lationship between these words. I then investi-
gate the change in “domestic” and “international”
topics before and after 1945, and find no effect.
There is ample belief and qualitative evidence of
a change in American views about the world after
1945, which is not captured in the structural topic
model. These differing results suggest that the em-
beddings are capable of recovering patterns in lan-
guage that document-based topic models cannot.

7 Diplomacy and the Onset of War

Natural language processing and text as data meth-
ods offer the opportunity to quantify decision-

3Results presented in the Appendix.

Post-1945

Pre-1945

-3000 -2000 -1000 0
International to Domestic Score 
(Positive is more International)

Shift is significant, D = 0.46, p = 0.005
Rhetoric is Less Internationalist After 1945

Figure 1: After 1945, rhetoric in inaugural addresses
becomes less internationalist, and more domestic.

making and attitude among elites, which is noto-
riously difficult to measure, especially in times of
conflict. Existing approaches to measuring elite
attitudes often depend on survey or laboratory ex-
periments (Feaver and Gelpi, 2006; LeVeck et al.,
2014), however, I offer an alternative approach
that allows us to examine elite decisions as they
occur. Drawing on a novel corpus of recently digi-
tized diplomatic cables, the Foreign Relations of
the United States (FRUS), I investigate whether
changes in the bellicosity of elite rhetoric pre-
cedes an escalation in US hostility. The FRUS
dataset provides an exciting opportunity to inves-
tigate bellicosity among American foreign policy
elites as events happened, as it contains primary
source documents of private communications from
the policymakers who develop and implement the
United States’ foreign policy. Among the sources
for documents included in FRUS are “Presiden-
tial libraries, Departments of State and Defense,
National Security Council, Central Intelligence
Agency, Agency for International Development,
and other foreign affairs agencies as well as the
private papers of individuals involved in formu-
lating U.S. foreign policy,” with a focus on doc-
uments relevant to policy-making (State Depart-
ment, 2017). When a FRUS volume is compiled,
the compiler(s) first identify a set of themes, de-
velop a list all relevant documents, and then select



12

Word of Interest Anchor: International, Domestic
war large declarations pay carefully choice equal this greater
peace practices meeting strife inspiring confederacy advance temple objections
american engagements soil cultivate by heroes goes pride she
international declare path honor expression speaking where vision ignorance
national temple subject learned demand advance objections principle guard

Anchor: American
war abroad remedies violate slaves violence declarations proposition sectional
peace army plenty victory effort resumption front regulation agreement
american regards brief instrumentality execute able friendly hands friendship
international assembly european continent capable various canal differing affected
national now recognition corporations monetary south more character diversity

Anchor: None
war made had peace force never after still place
peace world nations war strength prosperity progress just security
american through opportunity america life justice right individual equal
international maintain lasting fixed beneficial settlement likely relationship intercourse
national most necessity common given free first an power

Table 1: The most similar words to “war,” “peace,” “american,” “international,” and “national,” according to each
of the anchoring choices, measured via cosine similarity. Choosing appropriate anchors leads to more interpretable
embeddings than the unanchored model.

those with the greatest historical import. These are
then redacted or declassified, typeset, compared
to the original document, and printed and bound
(McAllister et al., 2015).

To explore elite bellicosity, I investigate behav-
ior during 1964-1966, the leadup to the Vietnam
War, and the breakdown of the ”Cold War Consen-
sus” (Krebs, 2015). The era is particularly inter-
esting because, while the United States increased
its commitment to Vietnam, it also engaged in sev-
eral other interventions around the world (Herring,
2008, ch. 16). Thus, we would expect to see
that an increase in bellicosity in the FRUS corpus
would be correlated with an increase in hostile ac-
tions by the United States.

I measure hostility using the Cline Center His-
torical Event Data, coded from the New York Times
(Althaus et al., 2017). These data take the form
(DATE, STATE A, ACTION, STATE B), where
(STATE A, STATE B) are directed dyads, DATE is
the day the event was observed, and ACTION is
one of five categories of action: neutral, verbal co-
operation, verbal conflict, material cooperation, or
material conflict (Norris et al., 2017). I select only
those events where STATE A is the United States,
and sum events at the biweekly level. I measure
hostility using counts of material conflict events,
and display the hostile event counts in Figure 2.

To calculate bellicosity, I first estimate a
Bayesian Word Embedding model, with context
window of 9, K = 50, keeping any word that oc-
curs at least 40 times. I then anchor the embed-
dings on a “war-peace” dimension. I summarize
the results of the anchoring using Uniform Mani-

fold Approximation and Projection for Dimension
Reduction (UMAP), which calculates a low di-
mensional number of components, similar to prin-
cipal components analysis. Unlike PCA, UMAP
calculates distance using cosine similarity, while
balancing both global and local structure in the
embeddings (Becht et al., 2019). I present results
in Table 2, and the components reveal themes in
the corpus, clustering by region and issue, helping
highlight the face validity of the embeddings.

To estimate the bellicosity of a given document,
I multiply the war-peace dimension by the docu-
ment term matrix, averaging document bellicosity
scores at the bi-weekly level. I plot the bi-weekly
bellicosity scores in Figure 2.

To determine if there is a relationship between
hostile events and bellicosity, I regress events on
the lagged bellicosity (to account for a delay in
policy implementation), using a Poisson general-
ized linear model, due to the count-distributed na-
ture of the outcome.4 I plot the regression line
against the data in Figure 3, and find a positive
and statistically significant effect.

This result suggests that bellicosity in elite
deliberations, captured in diplomatic documents,
results in an increase in conflictual events, which
suggests that the documents in the FRUS corpus
do not simply contain cheap talk, these deliber-
ations ultimately shape policy. These findings
also help establish the validity of the “bellicos-
ity” scale, that is, it correlates with an entirely

4In the appendix, I remove outliers and high-leverage
points from the dataset, and fit the model again. Results do
not change.



13

iran doubtful communications tam bases relatively robertson initials
iranian blocked relations systematically family zambia outflows secretary
shah sponsored appreciably north leave udi payments footnotes
aram ultimatum masses hanoi deployments tran liabilities present
iranians telecommunications sites recce fixed rhodesia fowler conflict
afghan recommendation overtures drv precondition sr banks president
squadron imminent concurs vinh laotian neighboring tax raymond
mnd jet harass chau reasons continent corporations even

Table 2: The top words from a subset of components estimated from UMAP. Components include a variety of
regional and substantive themes. These results help highlight the validity of the embeddings: semantically similar
words are appearing near each other in cosine space.

0

5

10

15

1964 1965 1966 1967

U.
S.

-In
itia

te
d 

Ho
sti

le 
Ev

en
ts

Biweekly Material Conflict
Event Counts

0

30

60

90

1964 1965 1966 1967

Av
er

ag
e 

Be
llic

os
ity

 S
co

re

Biweekly Bellicosity Score

Date, Biweekly, 1964-1966

Figure 2: Plotting material conflict event counts and
bellicosity scores over time aggregated at the bi-weekly
level. Both bellicosity and the count of material con-
flict events increase with time, as the United States in-
creased its involvement in the Vietnam War.

separate dataset, which captures a similar phe-
nomena. All replication materials are available at
https://github.com/adamlauretig/
bwe_application_naacl_2019.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, I introduced Bayesian Word Embed-
dings, a method for estimating word embeddings
which uses variational bayesian methods. I incor-
porated Automatic Relevance Determination pri-

0

5

10

15

0 30 60 90
Bellicosity

(Negative is More Peaceful)

U.
S.

-In
itia

te
d 

M
at

er
ial

 C
on

flic
t E

ve
nt

s

Material Conflict Events Increase
 in Response to Bellicosity in Foreign Policy

Figure 3: An increase in the previous bi-weekly pe-
riod’s bellicosity is associated with an increase in U.S.-
initiated hostile events. The regression is from a Pois-
son generalized linear model, and uncertainty is dis-
played with 95% confidence intervals.

ors on the embedding dimensions, relaxing the re-
quirement that all dimensions have equal weight.
Linking word embeddings to Bayesian latent vari-
able models, I then discussed issues with identi-
fication, and solutions proposed in the ideal-point
literature, as well as offering an alternative which
allows for scaling along dimensions of interest,
which creates model model that can then be used
in a regression.

I applied Bayesian Word Embeddings to two
cases: examining the change in American attitudes
about the world before and after 1945 as captured
in Presidential inaugural addresses, and then, test-
ing whether an increase in the bellicosity of inter-
nal elite discussion (in diplomatic documents) re-
sults in an increase in American hostility. I found

https://github.com/adamlauretig/bwe_application_naacl_2019
https://github.com/adamlauretig/bwe_application_naacl_2019


14

that there was a statistically significant different in
the views of the world expressed in inaugural ad-
dresses, and that this shift was the opposite of what
hypotheses generated from international relations
theory would expect. When testing the effect of
bellicosity on the hostility of American foreign
policy, I that an increase in bellicosity resulted in
an increase in hostility.

Overall, I have contributed a tool which can
serve many purposes for social scientists. By
building a probabilistic embedding model, I have
constructed a tool which moves beyond document-
based inferential approaches to text as data, allow-
ing inference on individual words. This promises
new reaches for social scientists, in particular,
the promise of crossover with interpretivist work,
building on Nelson (2017). Concepts such as secu-
ritization theory (Wæver, 1995) draw on the idea
that language and word choice by elites shape the
attitude of the public, and through the methods
introduced above provide the opportunity to gen-
erate statistical tests for hypotheses derived from
theories like securitization theory.

Future methodological work will follow three
tracks. The first will build on Rudolph et al. (2016)
and Han et al. (2018), one goal is incorporating
document-level metadata into embedding estima-
tion, allowing embeddings to vary according to
document-specific attributes, and then, identify-
ing the resulting embeddings. The second will
take advantage of stochastic variational inference
(Hoffman et al., 2013) to enable Bayesian Word
Embeddings to scale to massive corpora. Finally,
the third track for future word will involve ty-
ing the anchoring approach discussed above with
the emerging literature on making casual claims
from text (Fong and Grimmer, 2016; Mozer et al.,
2018), and taking advantage of the word similari-
ties to identify appropriate linguistic counterfactu-
als.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Bear Braumoeller, William
Minozzi, and Gregory Smith, along with the
three reviewers for valuable feedback on this
project. I would like to thank Michael Neblo
and the Institute for Democratic Engagement and
Accountability at Ohio State for funding which
helped support this project.

References
John H. Aldrich, Christopher Gelpi, Peter Feaver, Jason

Reifler, and Kristin Thompson Sharp. 2006. Foreign
policy and the electoral connection. Annual Review
of Political Science, 9:477–502.

John H. Aldrich, Jacob M. Montgomery, and David B.
Sparks. 2014. Polarization and ideology: Parti-
san sources of low dimensionality in scaled roll call
analyses. Political Analysis, 22(4):435–456.

Scott Althaus, Joseph Bajjalieh, John F. Carter, Buddy
Peyton, and Dan A. Shalmon. Cline center historical
phoenix event data [online]. 2017.

Joseph Bafumi, Andrew Gelman, David K. Park, and
Noah Kaplan. 2005. Practical issues in implement-
ing and understanding bayesian ideal point estima-
tion. Political Analysis, 13(2):171–187.

Oren Barkan. 2017. Bayesian neural word embedding.
In AAAI, pages 3135–3143.

Etienne Becht, Leland McInnes, John Healy, Charles-
Antoine Dutertre, Immanuel W.H. Kwok, Lai Guan
Ng, Florent Ginhoux, and Evan W. Newell. 2019.
Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell
data using umap. Nature biotechnology, 37(1):38.

Kenneth Benoit, Kohei Watanabe, Haiyan Wang, Paul
Nulty, Adam Obeng, Stefan Müller, and Akitaka
Matsuo. 2018. quanteda: An r package for the quan-
titative analysis of textual data. Journal of Open
Source Software, 3(30):774.

CM Bishop. 1999. Variational principal components.
In Artificial Neural Networks, 1999. ICANN 99.
Ninth International Conference on (Conf. Publ. No.
470), volume 1, pages 509–514. IET.

David M. Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D. McAuliffe.
2017. Variational inference: A review for statisti-
cians. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
tion, 112(518):859–877.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.

Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J. Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334):183–186.

Joshua Clinton, Simon Jackman, and Douglas Rivers.
2004. The statistical analysis of roll call data. Amer-
ican Political Science Review, 98(2):355–370.

James N. Druckman and Lawrence R. Jacobs. 2015.
Who Governs?: Presidents, Public Opinion, and
Manipulation. University of Chicago Press.

Peter D. Feaver and Christopher Gelpi. 2006. Choos-
ing your battles: American civil-military relations
and the use of force. Princeton University Press.

http://www.clinecenter.illinois.edu/data/phoenix/
http://www.clinecenter.illinois.edu/data/phoenix/


15

Christian Fong and Justin Grimmer. 2016. Discovery
of treatments from text corpora. In ACL (1).

Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and
James Zou. 2018. Word embeddings quantify
100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
115(16):E3635–E3644.

Matthew Gentzkow, Bryan T. Kelly, and Matt Taddy.
2017. Text as data. Technical report, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research.

Justin Grimmer. 2010. A bayesian hierarchical topic
model for political texts: Measuring expressed agen-
das in senate press releases. Political Analysis,
pages 1–35.

Justin Grimmer and Brandon M. Stewart. 2013. Text as
data: The promise and pitfalls of automatic content
analysis methods for political texts. Political Analy-
sis, page mps028.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Diachronic word embeddings reveal statisti-
cal laws of semantic change. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), vol-
ume 1, pages 1489–1501.

Rujun Han, Michael Gill, Arthur Spirling, and
Kyunghyun Cho. 2018. Conditional word embed-
ding and hypothesis testing via bayes-by-backprop.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
4890–4895.

Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. 2018. Embedding
words as distributions with a bayesian skip-gram
model. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
1775–1789.

George C. Herring. 2008. From colony to superpower:
US foreign relations since 1776. Oxford University
Press.

Matthew D. Hoffman, David M. Blei, Chong Wang,
and John Paisley. 2013. Stochastic variational infer-
ence. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
14(1):1303–1347.

Kosuke Imai, James Lo, and Jonathan Olmsted. 2016.
Fast estimation of ideal points with massive data.
American Political Science Review, 110(4):631–
656.

Geng Ji, Robert Bamler, Erik B. Sudderth, and Stephan
Mandt. 2017. Bayesian paragraph vectors. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.03946.

Austin C. Kozlowski, Matt Taddy, and James A. Evans.
2018. The geometry of culture: Analyzing mean-
ing through word embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.09288.

Ronald R. Krebs. 2015. How dominant narratives
rise and fall: Military conflict, politics, and the
cold war consensus. International Organization,
69(04):809–845.

Brad L LeVeck, D Alex Hughes, James H Fowler,
Emilie Hafner-Burton, and David G Victor. 2014.
The role of self-interest in elite bargaining. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
111(52):18536–18541.

Will Lowe, Kenneth Benoit, Slava Mikhaylov, and
Michael Laver. 2011. Scaling policy preferences
from coded political texts. Legislative studies quar-
terly, 36(1):123–155.

David J.C. MacKay and Radford M. Neal. 1994. Auto-
matic relevance determination for neural networks.
In Technical Report. Cambridge University.

William B. McAllister, Joshua Botts, Peter Cozzens,
and Aaron W. Marrs. 2015. Toward ”Thorough,
Accurate, and Reliable”: A History of the Foreign
Relations of the United States Series. Government
Printing Office.

John J. Mearsheimer. 2001. The tragedy of great power
politics. WW Norton & Company.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013a. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.

Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013b. Linguistic regularities in continuous space
word representations. In NAACL-HLT, volume 13,
pages 746–751.

Reagan Mozer, Luke Miratrix, Aaron Russell Kauf-
man, and L Jason Anastasopoulos. 2018. Match-
ing with text data: An experimental evaluation of
methods for matching documents and of measuring
match quality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00644.

Laura K. Nelson. 2017. Computational grounded the-
ory: A methodological framework. Sociological
Methods & Research, page 0049124117729703.

Clayton Norris, Philip Schrodt, and John Beieler. 2017.
Petrarch2: Another event coding program. The
Journal of Open Source Software, 2(9).

Caleb Pomeroy, Niheer Dasandi, and Slava Jankin
Mikhaylov. 2018. Multiplex communities and the
emergence of international conflict. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.00615.

Ludovic Rheault, Kaspar Beelen, Christopher
Cochrane, and Graeme Hirst. 2016. Measuring
emotion in parliamentary debates with automated
textual analysis. PloS one, 11(12):e0168843.

Douglas Rivers. 2003. Identification of multidimen-
sional spatial voting models. Typescript. Stanford
University.



16

Margaret E. Roberts, Brandon M. Stewart, and
Edoardo M. Airoldi. 2016. A model of text for ex-
perimentation in the social sciences. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, (just-accepted):1–
49.

Maja Rudolph, Francisco Ruiz, Stephan Mandt, and
David Blei. 2016. Exponential family embeddings.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 478–486.

State Department. About the foreign relations of the
united states series [online]. 2017.

Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of artificial intelligence research,
37:141–188.

Ole Wæver. 1995. Securitization and desecuritization.
In On Security, pages 46–86. Columbia University
Press.

Martin J. Wainwright and Michael I. Jordan. 2008.
Graphical models, exponential families, and varia-
tional inference. Foundations and Trends R© in Ma-
chine Learning, 1(1–2):1–305.

John R. Zaller. 1992. The nature and origins of mass
opinion. Cambridge university press.

A Comparing BWE to STM

Unlike the results from the Bayesian Word Em-
bedding, the structural topic model detects no dif-
ference in topics before and after 1945. The top
words, as determined by FREX score, are visible
in 3.

International Topic Domestic Topic
representative pacific
civilization territory
making question
international whilst
tax importance
popular constitution
concern slavery
supreme domestic

Table 3: Top eight words from structural topic model
for international and domestic topics, by FREX score.

B Inauguration Robustness Check

One concern with the role of internationalism in
inaugural addresses is that by splitting at 1945, the
“internationalism” of the pre-1945 sample is due
to World War Two, and the Roosevelt presidency.
To account for this, I re-estimate the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test from above, excluding the Roosevelt

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

Domestic Topic International Topic

Ch
an

ge
 in

 T
op

ics
 A

fte
r 1

94
5

No Shift in Domestic and International Topics
After 1945

Figure 4: There is no significant difference between
foreign and international topics before and after 1945,
uncertainty is displayed with 95% confidence intervals.

After 1945

Before 1932

-3000 -2000 -1000 0
International to Domestic Score 
(Positive is more International)

Shift is significant, D = 0.44, p = 0.009
Rhetoric is Less Internationalist After 1945

Figure 5: Even excluding the Roosevelt administration,
when only examining inaugural addresses from before
1932 and after 1945, the pre-1932 inaugural addresses
are more internationalist than the post-1945 addresses.

inaugural addresses, and present the results in 5.
This compares inaugurals from before 1932 to
those after 1945, and the substantive results do not
change.

https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/about-frus
https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/about-frus


17

5

10

0 30 60 90
Bellicosity

(Negative is More Peaceful)

U.
S.

-In
itia

te
d 

M
at

er
ial

 C
on

flic
t E

ve
nt

s
(Outliers Removed)

Material Conflict Events Increase
 in Response to Bellicosity in Foreign Policy

Figure 6: An increase in bellicosity is associated with
an increase in U.S.-initiated hostile events. The regres-
sion is from a Poisson generalized linear model, and
uncertainty is displayed with 95% confidence intervals.

C GLM without Outliers

To ensure that the results presented in Figure 3
were not the results of outliers, I removed any
outliers and high-leverage points, and re-fit the
model. The results were the same, as visible in
Figure 6.


