








































Preface: SCiL 2019 Editors’ Note 
 

Gaja Jarosz, Max Nelson, Brendan O’Connor and Joe Pater 
University of Massachusetts Amherst 

 
This volume contains research presented at the second annual meeting of the Society for 
Computation in Linguistics (SCiL), held in New York City, January 3-6, 2019, in 
conjunction with the annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America.  
 
These proceedings include the full length paper submissions that were peer-reviewed as 
papers and accepted for either oral or poster presentation at SCiL 2019. The first 13 
papers in the proceedings are those that were accepted as oral presentations, while the 
remaining 16 papers were presented as posters. Submissions to SCiL also included 
abstracts, which were presented as talks or posters at the conference. Further information, 
including the schedule and abstracts, can be found at our website: 
https://blogs.umass.edu/scil/scil-2019/. 
 
In total, we received 96 submissions to the conference, 52 abstracts and 44 papers. 22 
submissions were selected for oral presentation (23%) and 38 for poster presentation 
(40%). 51 of the submissions (53%) included a female author, and 34 (57%) of accepted 
submissions included a female author. 11 of the talks (50%) included a female author, 
and 23 of the posters (60%) included a female author1. We thank our reviewers for their 
indispensable help in selecting the research for presentation at the conference: 
 

Adam Albright, Jacob Andreas, Michael Becker, Leon Bergen, Su Lin Blodgett, 
Samuel Bowman, Miriam Butt, Damir Cavar, Alexander Clark, Jennifer 
Culbertson, Robert Daland, Hal Daumé III, Vera Demberg, Brian Dillon, Ewan 
Dunbar, Chris Dyer, Jacob Eisenstein, Allyson Ettinger, Robert Frank, Matt 
Goldrick, Sharon Goldwater, Thomas Graf, John Hale, Jeff Heinz, Kasia 
Hitczenko, Tracy Holloway King, Tim Hunter, Mohit Iyer, Gerhard Jaeger, Dan 
Jurafsky, Roni Katzir, Greg Kobele, Andrew Lamont, Tal Linzen, Giorgio Magri, 
Fred Mailhot, Rob Malouf, Andrea E. Martin, Nazarré Merchant, Elliott Moreton, 
Emily Morgan, Aleksei Nazarov, Brendan O'Connor, Tim O'Donnell, Alexis 
Palmer, Martha Palmer, Lisa Pearl, Heather Pon-Barry, Christopher Potts, 
Brandon Prickett, Ezer Rasin, James Rogers, Asad Sayeed, Nathan Schneider, 
Andrea Sims, Noah Smith, Edward Stabler, Mark Steedman, Emma Strubell, 
Colin Wilson, Kristine Yu 

 
Thanks also to Tom Maxfield for logistical help and Andrew Lamont for help preparing 
the proceedings. 
 
SCiL 2019 also included invited tutorials by Kasia Hitczenko (on Bayesian Models) and 
Allyson Ettinger (on Vector Space Models), invited talks by Mark Johnson and Gaja 
                                                
1 The gender statistics were collected informally and may have inaccuracies. We plan to discuss better 
methods for collecting and reporting gender information at the business meeting. Thanks to Yiding Hao for 
feedback. 

i
Proceedings of the Society for Computation in Linguistics (SCiL) 2019, pages i-ii.

New York City, New York, January 3-6, 2019



Jarosz on “Learning Hidden Linguistic Structure”, and an invited panel discussion on 
“What Should Linguists Know About NLP/ML” by  Sam Bowman, Chris Dyer, Allyson 
Ettinger, and Noah Smith. These invited sessions were funded by NSF conference grant 
BCS-1832737 to the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Further information can be 
found at our website: https://blogs.umass.edu/scil/scil-2019/.  
 

ii


