



















































Identification of Adverse Drug Reaction Mentions in Tweets – SMM4H Shared Task 2019


Proceedings of the 4th Social Media Mining for Health Applications (#SMM4H) Workshop & Shared Task, pages 136–137
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

136

Identification of Adverse Drug Reaction Mentions in Tweets – SMM4H
Shared Task 2019

Samarth Rawal
Arizona State University
samrawal@asu.edu

Siddharth Rawal
Arizona State University
sidrawal@asu.edu

Saadat Anwar
Arizona State University
sanwar@asu.edu

Chitta Baral
Arizona State University
chitta@asu.edu

Abstract

Analyzing social media posts can offer in-
sights into a wide range of topics that are
commonly discussed online, providing valu-
able information for studying various health-
related phenomena reported online. The out-
come of this work can offer insights into phar-
macovigilance research to monitor the adverse
effects of medications. This research specifi-
cally looks into mentions of adverse drug re-
actions (ADRs) in Twitter data through the
Social Media Mining for Health Applications
(SMM4H) Shared Task 2019. Adverse drug
reactions are undesired harmful effects which
can arise from medication or other methods of
treatment. The goal of this research is to build
accurate models using natural language pro-
cessing techniques to detect reports of adverse
drug reactions in Twitter data and extract these
words or phrases.

1 Introduction

On average, one in a thousand messages from pub-
lic Twitter data is health-related (Sadilek et al.,
2012). These health-related Twitter posts can be
used to monitor and analyze various health-related
phenomena such as drug use and side effects re-
sulting from medication. The purpose of this work
was to develop a model to accurately analyze men-
tions of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in Twitter
posts. To achieve this task, natural language pro-
cessing techniques were used to predict whether
each Tweet from a given set of Tweets contains a
mention of an ADR and extract any mentions of
ADRs. The results of this project can be useful for
research done in the field of pharmacovigilance,
which is the monitoring of drug effects with the
intention of finding and preventing adverse effects.
This work was conducted as part of the Social Me-
dia Mining for Health (SMM4H) challenge hosted
by the Health Language Processing (HLP) Lab at
the University of Pennsylvania. The predictions of

the models developed for this project were evalu-
ated against test data and given F-scores as well as
scores of accuracy, precision, and recall based on
the degree to which they were able to accomplish
the goals of each task.

2 Methods

2.1 Subtask 1

For Subtask 1, a lexicon-based approach was fol-
lowed. To identify important keywords – key-
words whose presence or absence in a Tweet can
serve as valuable, reliable indicators of whether
the Tweet contains a reference to an Adverse Drug
Reaction or not – a methodology adapted from
the Internal + External Lexicon Selection tech-
nique (Rawal et al., 2019), a technique that has
yielded successful results in previous similar clas-
sification tasks, was used. First, uni- and bi-grams
were extracted from the training dataset. The pres-
ence or absence of each of these n-grams were
then used as binary features in a logistic regres-
sion model. To estimate the performance of the
model using metrics that were to be used for eval-
uation, such as precision, recall, and F1-score, the
model was trained via 10-fold cross-validation of
the training set. Finally, the coefficients associ-
ated with each keyword were examined. There
were 166,466 total features obtained through the
aforementioned technique. Through this process,
the top 700 absolute-valued coefficients were hy-
pothesized to be the most significant keywords and
stored. This number of top keywords to keep was
a hyperparameter that was experimentally deter-
mined through model performance over 10-fold
cross-validation of the training set. This list of sig-
nificant keywords was then manually pared down
to exclude any intuitively irrelevant terms (such as
stop words); the presence or absence of these re-
maining keywords were used as binary features for
our final logistic regression model. Other mod-



137

els were also tested during training, such as a
BioBERT (Lee et al., 2019) model that was fine-
tuned using the provided training data. Although
the BioBERT model showed promising results, it
was not implemented into the final submission due
to time constraints.

2.2 Subtask 2

For Subtask 2, a deep learning approach was
taken. Specifically, a Bidirectional Long
Short-Term Memory (BiLSTM) coupled with a
Conditional Random Field (CRF) layer neural
network architecture was used to perform Named
Entity Recognition to identify the Adverse Drug
Reaction mentions. This architecture has been
empirically shown to perform well at Named
Entity Recognition (NER) tasks (Lample et al.,
2016). To represent input words, the Embedding
layer weights of the model was pre-initialized
with values obtained from a word2vec model that
was trained on the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson
et al., 2016).

Figure 1: BiLSTM-CRF neural network architecture

3 Results

On Task 1, our system performed with an F1
score of 0.4317, Precision of 0.3223, and Recall
of 0.6534.

On Task 2, on the relaxed metric, our system
performed with an F1 score of 0.535, Precision of
0.415, and Recall of 0.753; on the strict metric,

our system performed with an F1 score of 0.269,
Precision of 0.206, and Recall of 0.390.

4 Conclusion

Overall, our systems for Tasks 1 and 2 consisted
of a combination of (1) lexicon selection and
domain-specific feature engineering; (2) classical
machine learning techniques such as logistic re-
gression; and (3) neural architectures, including
BioBERT and BiLSTM-CRF models. We found
simpler models consisting of lexicon selection and
classical machine learning models (such as the lo-
gistic regression model discussed previously) per-
formed better with limited datasets and offered ex-
plainability into feature importance. In the Named
Entity Recognition task, we utilized a deep learn-
ing approach, given the demonstrated effective-
ness of such an architecture in this domain (Lam-
ple et al., 2016). We expect to improve the perfor-
mance of our systems through further refinement
of our feature engineering and tuning of our model
parameters.

Acknowledgments

The research team would like to thank Dr. Chitta
Baral of Arizona State University for providing
guidance and mentorship for this project.

References
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen,

H Lehman Li-wei, Mengling Feng, Moham-
mad Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits,
Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. 2016.
Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database.
Scientific data, 3:160035.

Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Sub-
ramanian, Kazuya Kawakami, and Chris Dyer. 2016.
Neural architectures for named entity recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01360.

Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim,
Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So,
and Jaewoo Kang. 2019. Biobert: a pre-trained
biomedical language representation model for
biomedical text mining. CoRR, abs/1901.08746.

Samarth Rawal, Ashok Prakash, Soumya Adhya, Sid-
harth Kulkarni, Saadat Anwar, Chitta Baral, and
Murthy V. Devarakonda. 2019. Developing and
using special-purpose lexicons for cohort selection
from clinical notes. CoRR, abs/1902.09674.

Adam Sadilek, Henry Kautz, and Vincent Silenzio.
2012. Modeling spread of disease from social in-
teractions.

http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.08746
http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.08746
http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.08746
http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.09674
http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.09674
http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.09674

