



















































MoNERo: a Biomedical Gold Standard Corpus for the Romanian Language


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2019 workshop, pages 71–79
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

71

MoNERo: a Biomedical Gold Standard Corpus for the Romanian
Language

Maria Mitrofan
RACAI, Bucharest, Romania

maria@racai.ro

Verginica Barbu Mititelu
RACAI, Bucharest, Romania

vergi@racai.ro

Grigorina Mitrofan
NIDMD “N.C. Paulescu”

Bucharest, Romania
grigorinam@gmail.com

Abstract

In an era when large amounts of data are gen-
erated daily in various fields, the biomedical
field among others, linguistic resources can
be exploited for various tasks of Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Moreover, increasing num-
ber of biomedical documents are available in
languages other than English. To be able to
extract information from natural language free
text resources, methods and tools are needed
for a variety of languages. This paper presents
the creation of the MoNERo corpus, a gold
standard biomedical corpus for Romanian, an-
notated with both part of speech tags and
named entities. MoNERo comprises 154,825
morphologically annotated tokens and 23,188
entity annotations belonging to four entity se-
mantic groups corresponding to UMLS Se-
mantic Groups.

1 Introduction

Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a research
area that provides methods to convert (human-
understandable) unstructured textual information
into (machine-readable) structured data and uses
it for different objectives. NLP techniques can
be used to process and exploit the large amount
of biomedical information which is continuously
generated. Examples of such repositories are
MEDLINE1, which contains more than 25 mil-
lion documents belonging to the biomedical do-
main, or PubMed Central2, which is an archive
of biomedical journal literature and contains more
than 5 million full-text articles. These resources
can be exploited and used together with different
NLP systems previously adapted to the biomedi-
cal field to improve the quality of the health care

1https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline.
html

2https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline.
html

process, to further develop research in the field
and benefit both physicians and patients. Infor-
mation Extraction (IE) tools can be used to ex-
tract relevant information from biomedical textual
resources (Goeuriot et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017).
Reaching suitable results for this NLP subtask is
not trivial and there is still room for improve-
ment of results. Advances of these IE tools de-
pend on the existence of annotated resources spe-
cific to the field of study (Wilbur et al., 2006;
Thompson et al., 2009; Kilicoglu, 2017), anno-
tated corpora being relevant in both phases: de-
velopment of the models that will determine the
behaviour of the system and system performance
evaluation. Even though the availability of these
resources has increased lately, the main part of the
efforts have been directed to the development of
annotated corpora for English in different subdo-
mains. However, MoNERo is a resource created
for the Romanian language that helps the develop-
ment of named entity recognition and classifica-
tion task especially for this language. Romanian
benefits from the existence of other corpora cre-
ated in our institute: the representative corpus of
contemporary language (CoRoLa) (Barbu Mititelu
et al., 2018), a balanced corpus (ROMBAC) (Ion
et al., 2012), the corpus annotated with verbal mul-
tiword expressions (Barbu Mititelu et al., 2019).
Just like all of these, MoNERo is annotated at the
morphological level. However, it stands out given
its annotation with four types of Named Entities
(NEs) for the medical domain, which are relevant
to the identification of: anatomy parts, diseases
and disorders, chemicals and drugs, and medical
procedures.

This paper has four main objectives: (i) to
present the construction of a biomedical gold stan-
dard corpus annotated both with part-of-speech
tags and named entities; (ii) to present general
statistics over the corpus; (iii) to release the final

https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline.html
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline.html
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline.html
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline.html


72

version of the corpus to the scientific community,
(iv) to show the contribution in the development
of NLP tools for Romanian language. All the re-
sults are discussed in parallel for the two types of
annotations.

2 Related Work

This section reviews relevant corpora annotated
with NEs specific to the biomedical domain.

1. For English we mention:

• CLEF corpus (Roberts et al., 2009) –
it contains 150 documents of clinical
narratives, histopathology reports and
imaging reports. It was subtracted from
a corpus of 565,000 documents and
manually annotated with six types of
NEs (condition, intervention, investiga-
tion, result, drug or device, locus);

• i2b2 corpus (Uzuner et al., 2010) – it
contains 1243 discharge summaries au-
tomatically pre-annotated, out of which
a subset of 251 was manually revised.
This corpus contains seven types of NEs
(medications, dosages, modes, frequen-
cies, durations, reasons of administra-
tion, list/narrative);

• NCBI corpus (Doğan et al., 2014) – a
gold-standard corpus for disease men-
tions and concepts that contains 793 ab-
stracts extracted from PubMed;

• CHEMDNER corpus (Krallinger et al.,
2015) – a corpus of 10,000 abstracts col-
lected from PubMed annotated with two
types of NEs: chemicals and drugs.

2. For French there is the Quaero corpus
(Névéol et al., 2014) which contains 103,056
words collected from three types of docu-
ments: texts with information on drugs ex-
tracted from European Medicines Agency
(EMEA), titles from research articles com-
prised in MEDLINE and patents. This corpus
was annotated with ten types of NEs defined
using UMLS: anatomy, chemical and drugs,
devices, disorders, geographic areas, living
beings, objects, phenomena, physiology, pro-
cedures.

3. For Spanish the following corpora exist:

• IxaMedGS corpus (Oronoz et al., 2015)
– it is composed of 142,154 discharge
records out of which 75 were annotated
with two types of NEs: diseases and
drugs;

• DrugSemantics corpus (Moreno et al.,
2017) – it has 226,729 tokens anno-
tated with ten types of NEs: chemi-
cal composition, disease, drug, excipi-
ent, food, medicament, pharmaceutical
form, route, therapeutic action, and unit
of measurement.

All these corpora are available and have had a
significant role in information extraction research,
especially in named entity recognition (NER) re-
search and were developed for well-established
purposes, having in mind the possibility of re-
usability.

3 Corpus Development Description

3.1 Selection of Corpus Documents

The gold standard morphologically and named en-
tity annotated Romanian medical corpus (MoN-
ERo) was extracted from the BioRo corpus
(Mitrofan and Tufiş, 2018), a Romanian biomed-
ical corpus. MoNERo contains texts extracted
from three types of documents: scientific medi-
cal literature books, scientific medical journal ar-
ticles and medical blog posts, but predominant are
those coming from medical literature. The medi-
cal books were chosen as the main source because
they contain descriptive materials, full of domain-
specific terms. In addition, the texts are of good
quality and the use of medical terms is correct.
The medical journal3 from which a part of the texts
were extracted is a scientific journal that addresses
the specialists, so the language used is specific to
the medical domain. In the case of blog posts those
collected were texts of popularization and aware-
ness of various medical problems.

The texts were selected so that they belong to
three medical subdomains: cardiology, diabetes
and endocrinology (see table 3). The main mo-
tivation behind choosing these three medical do-
mains is that our textual resources available were
centered around the pathology of Diabetes. Since
Diabetes is an endocrine disorder it is naturally in-
cluded in the Endocrinology category. In the same

3https://rmj.com.ro/

https://rmj.com.ro/


73

time because of a very close relation between dia-
betes and cardiovascular diseases we also obtain a
significant category from Cardiology field. Other
categories such as neurology, nephrology would
have had a very low contribution and we chose not
to take them separately but in Diabetes field, be-
cause the terms were related to diabetes complica-
tions.

The selection was made based on the metadata
scheme associated with each document present in
the BioRo corpus. The order of the sentences was
preserved.

All these texts are Intellectual Property Right
(IPR) cleared, thus enabling us to make it avail-
able to the community (see section 6).

3.2 MoNERo Annotation Scheme
The annotation scheme of MoNERo has two dif-
ferent levels: (i) a morphologic level at which all
part of speech tags were revised by an experienced
linguist; and (ii) a named entity level at which NEs
were identified and classified in the corresponding
semantic group.

3.2.1 Part of Speech Annotation Scheme
The process of the annotation of the corpus with
part of speech tags had two phases: automatic
annotation (all the texts comprised in this cor-
pus were previously processed when included in
BioRo, the source from which MoNERo was ex-
tracted) and manual verification of the tags allo-
cated by the tool used (see below section 3.3.1).
Here we present the manual verification phase
which was done by an expert linguist. The an-
notation scheme used for morphologic annota-
tion was based on the MSD tagset developed in
the Multext-East project (Dimitrova et al., 1998),
which contains 715 tags for Romanian. This tagset
is very complex and precise, containing fourteen
classes of words (noun, verb, adjective, adverb,
pronoun, determiner, article, adposition, conjunc-
tion, numeral, interjection, abbreviation, residual
and particle), each class having a set of attributes
such as: type, gender, number, case, definiteness,
clitic, verb form, tense, person, degree, etc. (Tufiş
et al., 1997).

3.2.2 Named Entities Annotation Scheme
In the case of named entities identification the an-
notation scheme was based on UMLS4 (Unified
Medical Language System) semantic groups. This

4https://semanticnetwork.nlm.nih.gov/

resource contains concepts from different termi-
nologies specific to the biomedical domain. More-
over, UMLS is organized as a hierarchical se-
mantic network that comprises semantic types and
semantic relations. All the semantic types are
grouped in 15 semantic groups (McCray et al.,
2001). For this work the annotation scheme con-
tains four semantic groups chosen from the UMLS
scheme: anatomy, chemicals and drugs, disorders
and procedures. The attributes of each entity type
are described below:

1. Anatomy (ANAT): body location or region,
body part, organ, or organ component, body
substance, body system, cell, fully formed
anatomical structure, tissue;

2. Chemicals and Drugs (CHEM): amino
acid, peptide, protein, antibiotic, biologically
active substance, chemical, clinical drug, hor-
mone, organic chemical, pharmacologic sub-
stance, receptor, steroid, vitamin;

3. Disorders (DISO): acquired abnormality,
anatomical abnormality, cell or molecular
dysfunction, congenital abnormality, disease
or syndrome, experimental model of disease,
finding, injury or poisoning, sign or symp-
tom;

4. Procedures (PROC): diagnostic procedure,
health care activity, laboratory procedure,
molecular biology research technique, ther-
apeutic or preventive procedure.

Examples for each type can be seen in Table 1.

Named Entity Example

Anatomy
pancreas (“pancreas”)

nerv optic (“optic nerve”)

Chemicals
and

Drugs

paracetamol (“paracetamol”)
acid folic (“folic acid”)

Disorders
diabet (“diabetes”)

fibrilaţie (“fibrillation”)

Procedures
EKG (“EKG”)

CT (“CT”)

Table 1: Examples of named entities extracted from
MoNERo.

https://semanticnetwork.nlm.nih.gov/


74

The main reason for choosing these four types
of entities was a trade off between the minimum
number of entities (due to an increased complex-
ity of the annotation process) and the maximum
relevance for our corpus. However we had some
challenges. For example, Physiology was a cate-
gory that could be included, but due to the fact that
the medical texts available were mainly related to
pathology, the contribution would have been lim-
ited (less than 5%).

Having a tokenized corpus with each token on
a separate line, we chose IOB2 (Insid-Outside-
Beginning) (Sang and Veenstra, 1999) as the an-
notation format for named entities. Lately, this
format has become popular within the scientific
community, being also supported by the CoNLL
challenges 5. The B-tag is used for the first token
of every NE, I-tag indicates the token that is inside
a named entity and O-tag is used for surrounding
tokens that do not belong to a NE (În/O schimb/O,
HDL-colesterolul/ B-CHEM, apolipoproteinele/B-
CHEM A/I-CHEM şi/O B/I-CHEM sunt/O su-
periori/O ca/O indicatori/O de/O risc/B-DISO
cardiovascular/I-DISO ./O) (“On the other hand,
HDL-cholesterol and lipoproteins A and B are su-
perior as cardiovascular risk indicators.”). For ease
of reading, in all the examples below we chose not
to mention the O-tag, but only the B- and I-tags.

3.3 Annotation Guidelines
3.3.1 Part of Speech
In the initial phase the corpus was automatically
preprocessed (sentence split, tokenized, lemma-
tized) and annotated with POS tags using the
TTL annotator (Ion, 2007; Mitrofan and Tufiş,
2018), which was trained on news corpora of
about 200,000 tokens with POS labeling checked
by trained linguists (Tufiş, 2000). The accuracy
for this task was 98.23%. When TTL was trained
in order to perform domain adaptation for biomed-
ical domain the accuracy was 97.83% (Mitrofan
and Ion, 2017). Therefore, in order to annotate
this corpus with POS tags the baseline model was
chosen. The second phase of the annotation pro-
cess, which makes the focus of this paper, was to
manually check all the automatically assigned la-
bels. A trained and experienced linguist revised all
the tokens included in MoNERo. For this task the
guidelines were:

1. correct the token if needed;
5http://www.conll.org/previous-tasks

2. correct the lemma if needed;

3. correct the POS tag if needed;

4. compounds written as separate words should
be split.

3.3.2 Named Entities
The guidelines for named entity annotation were:

1. a complex entity will not be decomposed into
simpler entities belonging to different seman-
tic groups; only one semantic group will be
associated to the longest entity (cancer de fi-
cat (“liver cancer”) will be annotated only as
a disorder, not as a disorder (cancer/B-DISO
de/I-DISO ficat/I-DISO (“cancer”/B-DISO)
“of”/I-DISO “liver”/I-DISO) and an anatom-
ical part (ficat/B-ANAT (“liver”/B-ANAT));
so, there is no embedded annotation;

2. in cases when one head noun is shared
by two or more biomedical named enti-
ties (coordinations or disjunctions) the an-
notation will be done as follows: in case
of coordinations ateroscleroza aortei şi a
vaselor periferice (“atherosclerosis of the
aorta and peripheral vessels”), should be
annotated as ateroscleroza/B-DISO aortei/I-
DISO şi vaselor/I-DISO periferice/I-DISO or
in case of disjunctions celule beta pancre-
atice sau hepatice (“pancreatic beta or hep-
atic cells”) should be annotated as celule/B-
ANAT beta/I-ANAT pancreatice/I-ANAT sau
hepatice/I-ANAT);

3. discontinuous entities will be annotated
as contiguous terms and classified in the
same semantic group: in the examples
Anevrismele/B-DISO pot fi fusiforme/I-
DISO (aspect cilindric al vasului/B-ANAT
sangvin/I-ANAT) sau sacciforme/I-DISO
(“Aneurysms/B-DISO may be fusiforms/I-
DISO (cylindrical appearance of the blood/B-
ANAT vessel/I-ANAT) or sacciforms/I-
DISO”) the NEs Anevrismele fusiforme and
anevrismele sacciforme are discontinuous;

4. in case of cascaded constructions when one
entity is incorporated in another entity (eg.
parenthetical constructions) the annotation
will be done as: Anevrismele/B-DISO
pot fi fusiforme/I-DISO (aspect cilindric
al vasului/B-ANAT sangvin/I-ANAT) sau

http://www.conll.org/previous-tasks


75

sacciforme/I-DISO (“Aneurysms/B-DISO
may be fusiforms/I-DISO (cylindrical
appearance of the blood/B-ANAT vessel/I-
ANAT) or sacciforms/I-DISO”). Within the
discontinuous NE Anevrismele sacciforme
there is another NE, vasului sangvin.

3.4 Annotation Development

3.4.1 Part of Speech Tags
Even though the accuracy of the automatic anno-
tation with POS tags was very high (subsection
3.3.1), given the high number of POS tags in the
Romanian MSD tagset, there was a lot of manual
work to be done by the linguist. This task involved
manual validation of tokenization, lemmatization,
and also correcting the errors of part of speech and
errors of morphological categories (see 3.5.1) for
each token.

3.4.2 Named Entities
For the named entities annotation task two annota-
tors were employed: one physician and one expe-
rienced annotator, both having Romanian as native
language. The physician was chosen as annotator
due to her capacity of understanding the medical
field. Prior to the annotation process there was a
training period for both annotators. In this phase
they debated issues such as whether or not to anno-
tate overlapping terms, when and if complex terms
should be decomposed, how conjunctions should
be treated.

Even though the initial guidelines gave them in-
structions on what should and should not be anno-
tated, they collaborated and discussed throughout
the annotation process. Even if the identification
of a biomedical entity was a relatively easy task,
fitting it into the correct semantic group some-
times required prior knowledge of the biomedical
vocabulary. Therefore the experienced annotator
has accessed various terminological resources in
order to better understand the terms and to cate-
gorized them into the correct semantic group. In
a post-annotation phase, the two annotators dis-
cussed the annotation differences in order to reach
agreement.

3.5 Discussion Over the Annotation Process

3.5.1 Part of Speech
During the manual correction process of the part
of speech tags the annotator encountered several
types of errors generated by the tool used:

1. tokenization errors: wrong segmentation of
time intervals (2000-2001) was annotated as
a single token), typos that led to wrong tok-
enization of the word (fi cat instead of ficat
(“liver”));

2. lemmatization errors: in case of the unknown
words (adenoamă instead of adenom (“ade-
noma”)) or in case of morphologically am-
biguous forms: the form copii can be the
plural indefinite of either the masculine noun
copil (“child”) or of the feminine noun copie
(“copy”); given this homography, the lemma-
tizer mistakes one of the words with the other
one;

3. tagging errors where classified in two cate-
gories:

• errors of part of speech – wrong auto-
matic identification of the part of speech
(nouns as adjectives, adjectives as ad-
verbs and vice versa, verbs as adjec-
tives);

• wrong identification of the morphologi-
cal class – the part of speech is correctly
identified but some of the specifications
are wrongly identified: gender, number,
case, etc.

Even though the overall error rate of the tool
used was low (1.77% see section 3.3.1) and pre-
annotation with POS tags of the corpus was use-
ful, the task of correcting it was a difficult one
due to the complexity of the tag set and the labori-
ous manual work needed to determine if the token,
lemma and POS tag are correct for each word in
the corpus. Annotation time ranges between 17 to-
kens per minute (at the beginning of the task) and
33 tokens per minute (after the annotator became
accustomed with the task and the types of errors).
The use of only one annotator for correcting the
POS tags is justified, on the one hand, by the low
error rate and, on the other, by the expense of the
task. However, we are aware of the limitation rep-
resented by the lack of inter-annotator agreement
measurements (even on a sample) on the morpho-
logical annotation.

3.6 Named Entities

The task of annotating the corpus with named en-
tities had an increased difficulty due to several fac-
tors such as:



76

• the need to understand specialized terminol-
ogy. Several cases can be identified here:

– completeness of NEs: given the lack
of expertise in the biomedical domain,
the expert annotator sometimes omit-
ted components of the complex entities,
thus attributing the NE a wrong class;

– ambiguity: both annotators needed to
agree upon the cases when to annotate
conjunctions present in some entities:
for example, although in the vast major-
ity of cases, the conjunction şi (“and”)
is not part of an NE, there are a few
cases when it is: one such example is the
NE ocluzia/B-DISO arterelor/I-DISO
mici/I-DISO şi/I-DISO mijlocii/I-DISO
(“occlusion of small and medium sized
arteries”) in which the conjunction şi is
part of the entity (see its annotation as I-
DISO) and does not get unannotated as
in an example such as ateroscleroza/B-
DISO aortei/I-DISO şi vaselor/I-DISO
periferice/I-DISO (“atherosclerosis of
aorta and peripheral vessels”);

– abbreviations: this challenge was en-
countered especially by the experienced
annotator. It is known that biomedical
literature is very rich in abbreviations
(Federiuk, 1999). Unless their meaning
is clear to the annotator, a wrong type
can be assigned to it. What is more,
many abbreviations are difficult to cor-
rectly classify because of their multi-
ple meanings. For example, depending
on the context, ACE can be angiotensin
convertază (“angiotensin-converting en-
zyme”) and it belongs to ”Chemicals
and Drugs” semantic class or electro-
foreză capilară de afinitate (“affinity
capillary electrophoresis”) and in this
case it is correctly labeled as “Proce-
dure”; notice also that the abbreviation
is borrowed from English, thus posing
challenges to the annotator lacking med-
ical background;

• four different entities types.
Annotating all relevant entities was itself a
challenge. One reason for this is the lack of
prior knowledge of biomedical terminologies
by the experienced annotator, some of the

terms encountered not being covered in the
terminological resources used for this task or
being present with other senses than the one
needed;

• the use of IOB2 format, which is an elabo-
rated type of annotation format.

Estimated annotation time for this task was
about 15 tokens per minute (for the experienced
annotator) and 30 tokens per minute (for the physi-
cian).

The consistency of the annotations was estab-
lished computing the (Carletta, 1996) coefficient
on a sample of 1,628 tokens annotated by the two
annotators, especially for this, after they finished
the annotation. For this set the Kappa coefficient
was 92.8%, denoting high agreement between the
two annotators and indicates that the annotation
was reliable.

4 Corpus General Statistics

Table 2 presents general corpus statistics offering
an overview of the MoNERo corpus. Currently
it contains 154,825 tokens (including the punctua-
tion) distributed in 4,989 sentences, all of them an-
notated with POS tags and NEs. It can be seen that
the average sentence length, 31 tokens/sentence, is
above 16.06 tokens/sentence, the average sentence
length in a balanced Romanian corpus, containing
legal, news, medical (i.e. pharmacological), fic-
tion and biographical texts (Ion et al., 2012).

Sentences 4,987
Tokens 154,825
Tokens/Sentence 31.04
Punctuation 20,741
Punctuation/Sentence 4.15

Table 2: MoNERo statistics.

Table 3 presents the distribution of sentences
across the domains addressed. As can be seen,
the distribution of sentences is not balanced, this
being the result of the fact that due to copyright
restrictions, the same number of sentences could
not be collected for each of the selected domains,
especially in the case of endocrinology.

Table 4 presents the distribution of content
words. As can be seen, nouns are the most fre-
quent ones, followed by adjectives: medical lit-
erature (especially medical literature books) has a



77

Domain #tokens #sentences
Cardiology 63,043 2,028
Diabetes 69,085 2,136
Endocrinology 22,697 823
Total 154,825 4,987

Table 3: Distribution of corpus sentences correspond-
ing to each medical field.

descriptive structure, there are cases when nouns
are modified by two or more adjectives: bronşită
cronică obstructivă (“chronic obstructive bronchi-
tis”). We notice quite an important number of
abbreviations: the scientific subcomponent of the
Romanian reference corpus, CoRoLa (Barbu Mi-
titelu et al., 2018), contains 1.16% abbreviations,
whereas MoNERo contains 1.9%. In the medical
domain, as opposed to other scientific domains, it
is common practice to designate concepts by ab-
breviated forms.

Tag Percentage
Noun 27.8%
Verb 10.4%
Adjective 11.5%
Adverbs 3.5 %
Abbreviations 1.9 %
Total 55.1 %

Table 4: Percentages of content words.

Table 5 presents the distribution of entity an-
notation over each of the four semantic groups.
This table highlights the fact that the most frequent
NE categories are CHEM and DISO, PROC and
ANAT being less frequent.

NE type No. of entities
ANAT 1,964
CHEM 4,156
DISO 6,611
PROC 1,402
Total 14,133

Table 5: NEs distribution.

5 Corpus format

The corpus is available in a tabular format that
contains four columns, UTF-8 encoded, with LF
character as line break. Each line contains an-
notations of a token in four fields separated by

a tab character: word form or punctuation sym-
bol (token), lemma of the word form, NER tag
and POS tag. We show below the annotation of
the sentence: Abordul arterei iliace comune se
face retroperitoneal, iar grefonul folosit este unul
sintetic din Dracon sau PTFE. (“The access to
the common iliac artery is retroperitoneal, and
the graft used is a synthetic one from Dracon or
PTFE.”)

Abordul abord B-PROC Ncmsry
arterei arter I-PROC Ncfsoy
iliace iliac I-PROC Afpfson
comune comun I-PROC Afpfson
se sine O Px3--a--------w
face face O Vmip3s
retroperitoneal retroperitoneal O
Rgp
, ,O COMMA
iar iar O Rc
grefonul grefon O Ncmsry
folosit folosit O Afpms-n
este fi O Vmip3s
unul unul O Pi3msr
sintetic sintetic O Afpms-n
din din O Spsa
Dacron dacron O Ncms-n
sau sau O Ccssp
PTFE PTFE O Yn
. . O PERIOD

6 Utility of the corpus

There are several reasons for which MoNERo has
an important contribution in named entity recog-
nition and information extraction:

• it is the first Romanian gold standard biomed-
ical corpus annotated with both part of speech
tags and named entities;

• it was annotated with four types of named
entities, making it very useful for training
and testing NER systems based on supervised
learning;

• it is pre-processed: tokenized, lemmatized
and annotated with part of speech tags;

• it has a tabular format that makes it easy to
use and the annotations are compliant with
IOB2 format standards;



78

• it is a resource in a language other than En-
glish, which can help to train and test NER
systems to perform language and domain
adaptation;

• it is freely available for download6 and non-
commercial use. The archive contains three
files, one for each medical domain, and an-
other file containing all the other ones.

To prove the maturity and utility of this re-
source we used it to train and test a NER sys-
tem (Boroş et al., 2018) for biomedical named
entity recognition task for Romanian language.
The architecture used is based on Bidirectional
Long-Short-Term Memory (BDLSTM) networks
(Graves, 2012). The system is trained to pro-
duce fully connected subgraphs. The feature-set
is composed of word embeddings and character-
level embeddings. In order to train the system the
corpus was split in three sets: training set 80%,
development set 10% and test set 10%. The eval-
uation of the performance of the system was done
computing the F1 score and a score of 81.4 was
obtained 7. This experiment represents a starting
point for the development/adaptation of NER sys-
tems for biomedical domain in Romanian.

7 Conclusions

We presented the MoNERo corpus, a gold stan-
dard biomedical corpus for Romanian language
enhanced with two types of annotations: morpho-
logical and named entities specific to the biomedi-
cal field. To our knowledge this is the first biomed-
ical corpus of this type for the Romanian language.
This resource has already proven its value and util-
ity, having been used in the development of the
NER systems for the Romanian language. The
MoNERo corpus is freely available for download
and non-commercial use, which makes it even
more valuable for the community.

8 Acknowledgements

Part of the work presented here was supported by
a grant of the Romanian Ministry of Research and
Innovation, PCCDI - UEFISCDI, project num-
ber PN-III-P1-1.2-PCCDI-2017-0818/72, within

6The corpus is accessible at http://www.racai.
ro/en/tools/text/

7The tool trained can be accessed at the following ad-
dress: http://89.38.230.23/teprolin/index.
php?path=teprolin/custom

PNCDI III. We would like to thank the three
anonymous reviewers for the valuable suggestions
and hard work.

References
Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Mihaela Cristescu, and Mi-

haela Onofrei. 2019. The Romanian Corpus Anno-
tated with Verbal Multiword Expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multiword Ex-
pressions and WordNet (MWE-WN 2019), Florence,
Italy.

Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Dan Tufiş, and Elena Irimia.
2018. The Reference Corpus of the Contempo-
rary Romanian Language (CoRoLa). In Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018),
pages 1178–1185, Miyazaki, Japan. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Tiberiu Boroş, Stefan Daniel Dumitrescu, and Ruxan-
dra Burtica. 2018. NLP-cube: End-to-end raw text
processing with neural networks. In Proceedings of
the CoNLL 2018 Shared Task: Multilingual Pars-
ing from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies, pages
171–179, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational lin-
guistics, 22(2):249–254.

Ludmila Dimitrova, Nancy Ide, Vladimir Petkevic,
Tomaz Erjavec, Heiki Jaan Kaalep, and Dan Tufiş.
1998. Multext-east: Parallel and comparable cor-
pora and lexicons for six central and eastern euro-
pean languages. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and 17th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL ’98/COL-
ING ’98, pages 315–319, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rezarta Islamaj Doğan, Robert Leaman, and Zhiyong
Lu. 2014. Ncbi disease corpus: a resource for dis-
ease name recognition and concept normalization.
Journal of biomedical informatics, 47:1–10.

Carol S Federiuk. 1999. The effect of abbreviations on
medline searching. Academic emergency medicine,
6(4):292–296.

Lorraine Goeuriot, Liadh Kelly, Hanna Suominen,
Aurélie Névéol, Aude Robert, Evangelos Kanoulas,
Rene Spijker, Joao Palotti, and Guido Zuccon. 2017.
Clef 2017 ehealth evaluation lab overview. In Inter-
national Conference of the Cross-Language Evalu-
ation Forum for European Languages, pages 291–
303. Springer.

Alex Graves. 2012. Supervised sequence labelling. In
Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural
networks, pages 5–13. Springer.

http://www.racai.ro/en/tools/text/
http://www.racai.ro/en/tools/text/
http://89.38.230.23/teprolin/index.php?path=teprolin/custom
http://89.38.230.23/teprolin/index.php?path=teprolin/custom
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/K18-2017
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/K18-2017
https://doi.org/10.3115/980845.980897
https://doi.org/10.3115/980845.980897
https://doi.org/10.3115/980845.980897


79

Radu Ion. 2007. Word Sense Disambiguation Methods
Applied to English and Romanian (in Romanian).
Ph.D. thesis, Romanian Academy.

Radu Ion, Elena Irimia, Dan Stefanescu, and Dan Tufiş.
2012. Rombac: The romanian balanced annotated
corpus. In LREC, pages 339–344. Citeseer.

Halil Kilicoglu. 2017. Biomedical text mining for
research rigor and integrity: tasks, challenges, di-
rections. Briefings in bioinformatics, 19(6):1400–
1414.

Martin Krallinger, Obdulia Rabal, Florian Leitner,
Miguel Vazquez, David Salgado, Zhiyong Lu,
Robert Leaman, Yanan Lu, Donghong Ji, Daniel M
Lowe, et al. 2015. The chemdner corpus of chemi-
cals and drugs and its annotation principles. Journal
of cheminformatics, 7(1):S2.

Fei Li, Meishan Zhang, Guohong Fu, and Donghong
Ji. 2017. A neural joint model for entity and relation
extraction from biomedical text. BMC bioinformat-
ics, 18(1):198.

Alexa T McCray, Anita Burgun, and Olivier Boden-
reider. 2001. Aggregating umls semantic types for
reducing conceptual complexity. Studies in health
technology and informatics, 84(0 1):216.

Maria Mitrofan and Radu Ion. 2017. Adapting the ttl
romanian pos tagger to the biomedical domain. In
BiomedicalNLP@ RANLP, pages 8–14.

Maria Mitrofan and Dan Tufiş. 2018. Bioro: The
biomedical corpus for the romanian language. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2018).

Isabel Moreno, Ester Boldrini, Paloma Moreda, and
M Teresa Romá-Ferri. 2017. Drugsemantics: a
corpus for named entity recognition in spanish
summaries of product characteristics. Journal of
biomedical informatics, 72:8–22.

Aurélie Névéol, Cyril Grouin, Jeremy Leixa, Sophie
Rosset, and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2014. The quaero
french medical corpus: A ressource for medical en-
tity recognition and normalization. In In Proc Bio-
TextM, Reykjavik. Citeseer.

Maite Oronoz, Koldo Gojenola, Alicia Pérez,
Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, and Arantza Casillas.
2015. On the creation of a clinical gold standard
corpus in spanish: Mining adverse drug reactions.
Journal of biomedical informatics, 56:318–332.

Angus Roberts, Robert Gaizauskas, Mark Hepple,
George Demetriou, Yikun Guo, Ian Roberts, and
Andrea Setzer. 2009. Building a semantically anno-
tated corpus of clinical texts. Journal of biomedical
informatics, 42(5):950–966.

Erik F Sang and Jorn Veenstra. 1999. Representing text
chunks. In Proceedings of the ninth conference on
European chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 173–179. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Paul Thompson, Syed A Iqbal, John McNaught, and
Sophia Ananiadou. 2009. Construction of an anno-
tated corpus to support biomedical information ex-
traction. BMC bioinformatics, 10(1):349.

Dan Tufiş. 2000. Using a large set of eagles-compliant
morpho-syntactic descriptors as a tagset for proba-
bilistic tagging. In Proceedings of LREC.

D Tufiş, AM Barbu, V Pătraşcu, G Rotariu, and
C Popescu. 1997. Corpora and corpus-based
morpho-lexical processing. Recent Advances in Ro-
manian Language Technology, Editura Academiei,
pages 35–56.

Özlem Uzuner, Imre Solti, Fei Xia, and Eithon
Cadag. 2010. Community annotation experiment
for ground truth generation for the i2b2 medication
challenge. Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association, 17(5):519–523.

W John Wilbur, Andrey Rzhetsky, and Hagit Shatkay.
2006. New directions in biomedical text annota-
tion: definitions, guidelines and corpus construction.
BMC bioinformatics, 7(1):356.


