




































Neural machine translation system for the Kazakh language 
 

Ualsher Tukeyev 

Al-Farabi Kazakh National University 

71 Al-Farabi ave., Almaty, 050040,  

Kazakhstan 

ualsher.tukeyev@gmail.com 

Zhandos Zhumanov 

Al-Farabi Kazakh National University 

71 Al-Farabi ave., Almaty, 050040,  

Kazakhstan 

z.zhake@gmail.com 

 

 

1 Abstract 

“Development and research of the Kazakh 

language neural machine translation sys-

tem” is a 3-year-long project funded by 

the Science Committee of Ministry of Ed-

ucation and Science of the Republic of 

Kazakhstan. The project is being executed 

by the team of the Laboratory of Intelli-

gent Information Systems at the Research 

Institute of Mathematics and Mechanics 

of al-Farabi Kazakh National University. 

Duration of the project: January 2018 – 

December 2020. 

1 The purpose of the project 

The purpose of the project is to create neural 

machine translation technology for the Kazakh 

language aiming at a high quality of machine 

translation, specifically adapted to the features of 

the Kazakh language. 

Since 2013 the direction of machine translation 

based on recurrent neural networks, that is, neural 

machine translation, is intensively developing, 

and is actively explored for popular world lan-

guages. Practical applications of neural machine 

translation, in particular, in Google Translate, 

show impressive results. At the same time, neural 

machine translation research for the Kazakh lan-

guage as a low resource language is a topical task. 

This project aims to fill that gap. 

2 Project objectives 

One problem that affects the quality of neural 

machine translation for Kazakh is the fact that 

parallel corpora with large volumes of data are not 

                                                           

1 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Cre-
ative Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CC-BY-ND. 

developed for the Kazakh language. Currently we 

have a small parallel corpus of approximately 

140 000 Kazakh–English sentences, and a 

Kazakh–Russian corpus of a similar size. To solve 

this problem, in the project we will leverage on 

existing corpora of related languages. 

The objectives of the project are investigation 

of: 

- the basic version of the neural machine 
translation of the Kazakh language, using 

standard technology of NMT to Kazakh; 

- the morphological segmentation for the 
Kazakh language NMT; 

- the development of syntactic corpora for 
NMT of Kazakh; 

- the development of models and algo-
rithms for solving the problem of un-

known words for the neural machine 

translation of the Kazakh language; 

- the evaluation of the quality of the neural 
machine translation of the Kazakh lan-

guage. 

Our team had worked on a project titled “De-

velopment of free/open-source machine transla-

tion system for Kazakh–English and Kazakh–

Russian (and vice versa) on the base of Apertium 

platform.” in 2015–2017. Language resources 

created in the previous project are used in the cur-

rent one [1, 2, 3]. 

Investigation of the basic version of the neural 

machine translation of the Kazakh language is 

based on the use of recurrent neural networks us-

ing the "encoder–semantic representation–de-

coder" model [4]. Along with that we will explore 

transformer architecture as well. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 123



3 Expected results of the project 

Project results will include technology (models, 

algorithms and software) of neural machine 

translation, adapted to the features of the Kazakh 

language. The system of neural machine 

translation of the Kazakh language will be 

developed as a free/open-source system. 

4 Current results and future plans 

The first part of the project is focused on Kazakh–

English language pair. The second part will be 

focused on Kazakh–Russian language pair. At the 

end of the first year, the following results were 

achieved: the technology of hybrid automaton-

neural machine translation of the Kazakh 

language based on the complete system of Kazakh 

language endings [5]; the preprocessor of 

morphological segmentation in Kazakh–English 

neural machine translation system; the 

postprocessor of morphological desegmentation 

in Kazakh–English neural machine translation 

system. Because of agglutinative nature words in 

Kazakh are formed by adding affixes. Different 

forms of the same word could be used in text and 

treated as different words if segmentation is not 

applied. The fact that the rules for adding affixes 

are very strict allows for creation of a complete 

system of Kazakh language endings, which 

simplifies segmentation and helps reducing 

vocabulary. 

Current work is directed at gathering more par-

allel corpora by crawling multilingual web-sites 

with various tools, experimenting with different 

neural machine translation architectures, transla-

tion of unknown (out of vocabulary) words and 

integrating all of techniques that prove to be effec-

tive into one neural translation system. Our team 

consists from 7 members, described project have 

45 million tenge (100 000 euro) on three year 

(2018–2020) funded by Kazakh government. 

References 

[1] Tukeyev U.A., Rakhimova D.R., Zhumanov Zh.M., 

Kartbayev A.Zh. Single state transducer model for 

Kazakh and Russian morphology // KazNU BUL-

LETIN, Mathematics, Mechanics, Computer Sci-

ence Series. – Алматы, «Қазақ университетi». – 

2016. – №2 (89). – P. 110-117. 

[2] Rakhimova D. R., Tukeyev U.A., Zhumanov Zh.M. 

Methodology of the automated enrichment of ma-

chine translation system dictionaries for Kazakh–

Russian and Kazakh–English language pair // Pro-

ceedings of 4th International conference on Turkic 

languages (“TurkLang–2016”). – Bishkek, Kyrgyz-

stan, 2016. – С. 81-85. 

[3] Zhumanov Zh., Madiyeva A., Rakhimova D. New 

Kazakh Parallel Text Corpora with On-line Access. 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science. – 2017. – 

10449. – pp. 501-508. 

[4] Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. 

Linguistic Regularities in Continuous Space Word 

Representations. The Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics. In HLTNAACL, p. 746–

751(2013). 

[5] Tukeyev U., Sundetova A., Abduali B., Akhmad-

iyeva Zh., Zhanbussunov N. Inferring of the mor-

phological chunk transfer rules on the base of com-

plete set of Kazakh endings // LNAI 9876, Compu-

tational Collective Intelligence, Part 2, Springer, 

2016, pp. 563-574 

 

 

 

 

 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 124


