












































Untitled


Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Computational Approaches to Historical Language Change, pages 29–34
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

29

Evaluation of Semantic Change of Harm-Related Concepts in Psychology

Ekaterina Vylomova Sean Murphy Nick Haslam

School of Psychological Studies, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
{vylomovae,nhaslam}@unimelb.edu.au seanchrismurphy@gmail.com

Abstract

The paper focuses on diachronic evaluation

of semantic changes of harm-related concepts

in psychology. More specifically, we investi-

gate a hypothesis that certain concepts such as

“addiction”, “bullying”, “harassment”, “preju-

dice”, and “trauma” became broader during

the last four decades. We evaluate seman-

tic changes using two models: an LSA-based

model from Sagi et al. (2009) and a diachronic

adaptation of word2vec from Hamilton et al.

(2016), that are trained on a large corpus of

journal abstracts covering the period of 1980–

2019. Several concepts showed evidence of

broadening. “Addiction” moved from physio-

logical dependency on a substance to include

psychological dependency on gaming and the

Internet. Similarly, “harassment” and “trauma”

shifted towards more psychological meanings.

On the other hand, “bullying” has transformed

into a more victim-related concept and ex-

panded to new areas such as workplaces.

1 Introduction

During the last decade the area of diachronic lan-

guage modelling has witnessed substantial progress

and development. This technical development en-

ables enhanced understanding of pressing issues in

social science disciplines. In this paper, we focus

on diachronic change in the semantics of harm-

related concepts within psychology. In particular,

we test a “concept creep” hypothesis proposed by

Haslam (2016). The hypothesis states that during

the last half century many concepts related to harm

have broadened their meanings. In order to test the

hypothesis, we utilize two diachronic models: a

count-based approach from Sagi et al. (2009), and

a prediction-based approach from Hamilton et al.

(2016). In both cases, we estimate the breadth of

a concept as its average cosine similarity, i.e. the

lower the similarity between concepts vector repre-

sentations, the broader the concept’s meaning. We

additionally investigate how exactly the meanings

have changed.

2 The Notion of Concept Creep

Haslam (2016) put forward the notion of concept

creep to describe an apparent expansion in the

meanings of several fundamental psychological

concepts. He presented a series of case studies

in which psychological researchers and theorists

expanded the sense of these concepts by loosening

definitions to include milder instances (“vertical

creep”) or by extending definitions to encompass

cognate phenomena (“horizontal creep”). More

example, the concept of “mental disorder” has pro-

gressively broadened in recent decades by relaxing

the diagnostic criteria of some conditions and by

expanding the range of problems conceptualized

as falling within the psychiatric domain. Haslam

documented how similar semantic inflation had

occurred for concepts including abuse, addiction,

prejudice, and trauma. Haslam proposed that these

diverse concepts shared a focus on harm (i.e., the

experience or infliction of actual or potential suf-

fering). He therefore speculated that the correlated

broadening of the creeping concepts reflected a

rising sensitivity to harm within Western cultures.

In the present research we examine the following

putatively creeping concepts:

1 Addiction. This concept originally referred

to physiological dependency on an ingested sub-

stance, but is increasingly used to identify psy-

chological compulsion to engage in non-ingestive

behaviors such as gambling or shopping.

2 Bullying. This concept, introduced to psy-

chology in the 1970s, initially described peer ag-

gression between children that was repeated, in-

tentional, and perpetrated in the context of power

imbalance. More recent definitions extend bullying

to adult workplace settings and relax the repetition,



30

intentionality, and power imbalance criteria.

3 Harassment. Early uses of this concept em-

phasized inappropriate sexual approaches but more

recently harassment is also used within psychology

to refer to nonsexual forms of unwanted attention.

4 Prejudice. The original psychological defi-

nitions of prejudice restricted it to overt animosity

towards ethnic or racial outgroups. More recent

theory and research extend it to many non-racial

groups, allow for covert or non-conscious preju-

dice, and indicate that it may be manifest as anxiety

or condescension rather than hostility.

5 Trauma. Four decades ago only personally

encountered life-threatening events that are outside

the realm of normal experience were recognized

as traumatic by psychologists. More recent defini-

tions include vicarious or indirect experiences of

stressful events, including those that are relatively

prevalent.

3 Related Work

Existing work on concept creep is primarily the-

oretical and the idea has been taken up by influ-

ential writers. Lukianoff and Haidt (2018) have

employed it to understand political conflict on col-

lege campuses. Pinker (2018) has argued that

concept creep leads people to under-estimate so-

cial progress because their definitions of hardship

expand to include increasingly minor problems.

This phenomenon has been demonstrated by Levari

et al. (2018), who showed that concept definitions

broaden as concept instances become scarcer. Mc-

Grath et al. (2019) has explored the attributes of

people who hold relatively broad creeping-related

concepts, finding that they tend to be politically

liberal and their personal morality is tied to harm

and care for others. Wheeler et al. (2019) stud-

ied the Google Books English language corpus

and showed that words representing harm-based

morality has become more culturally salient (i.e.,

relatively frequent) in the past four decades, con-

sistent with the theory of concept creep. However,

to date no research has examined in theory’s core

claim that the meaning of harm-related concepts

have systematically broadened within psychologi-

cal discourse. The present research aims to remedy

this lack using a large new corpus and diachronic

language modelling.

Although diachronic studies of language have

long history in linguistics, computational ap-

proaches to diachronic language modelling were in-

troduced only recently. Jurgens and Stevens (2009),

one of the first, proposed an algorithm for track-

ing temporal semantic changes by learning a se-

quence of distributional models over time. The

work was followed by an LSA-based model from

Sagi et al. (2009). Kim et al. (2014) and Hamil-

ton et al. (2016) then proposed the first prediction-

based neural models. The latter work also formu-

lated a number of laws of semantic change by ex-

ploring correlations between semantic changes and

word frequency. Some of the laws were afterwards

questioned and reformulated in (Dubossarsky et al.,

2017).

0

20000

40000

1950 1975 2000

Figure 1: Statistics on the number of abstracts per year.

4 Corpus Description

The corpus comprises abstracts from journals in the

field of psychology covering the period of 1930–

2019 that were collected from the E-Research and

the PubMed databases. In total, there are 871, 340

abstracts from 875 journals resulting in 133, 082,

240 tokens in total. We only focus on abstracts

since they distill the core ideas of the paper and

provide a compact summary of the main contribu-

tions and findings.1 Fig. 1 presents the number of

abstracts for each year . Due to relatively small

amount of abstracts during the first half of the 20th

century, for the purpose of our experiments we only

consider time periods after 1970.

1Restrictions related to copyright also limited our focus to
abstracts.



31

0.00

0.02

0.04

1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020

harassment trauma addiction bullying prejudice

Figure 2: Relative word frequencies based on abstracts

from psychology journals.

5 Experiments

5.1 Preprocessing Steps

We tokenized the corpus, removed punctuation,

numbers, stop-words and non-English words, did

fold-casing and lemmatization using SpaCy.2

0.10

0.15

0.20

198x 199x 200x 201x

harassment trauma addiction bullying prejudice

Figure 3: Average cosine similarities over five decades.

5.2 Frequency Analysis

For each of five concepts we first evaluated their

(unigram) frequency distribution over time.3 Al-

2https://spacy.io/
3We applied a minor “moving average” smoothing with

window size of 1, i.e. f1972 = (f1971 + f1972 + f1973)/3.

though all the concepts demonstrate a certain rela-

tive raise of frequency, Trauma exhibits the steepest

slope, while Harassment has its peak in the mid-

nineties. Does it mean that Trauma became broader

over time, i.e. it expanded to a whole range of new

contexts? Has Harassment expanded to new con-

texts as well?

In the next section, we adapt two most widely

used contemporary models, a count-based model

from Sagi et al. (2009) and a prediction-based one

from Hamilton et al. (2016). The former provides

us with a time-specific measure of semantic breadth

for each concept while the latter shows how exactly

concepts changed. Both models have previously

shown their utility at capturing semantic changes

over time (Tahmasebi et al., 2018; Kutuzov et al.,

2018).

5.3 Sagi et al.’s Model

Our first part of the experiments is based on the

LSA-based model proposed by Sagi et al. (2009).

We follow their instructions, i.e. we create a term–

document co-occurrence matrix on the basis of the

whole corpus. The total number of terms is re-

stricted to 40,000 most frequent ones. We follow

the vanilla TF-IDF model weights with logarith-

mic smoothing. The resulting matrix is factorized

with SVD and truncated to 200 dimensions.4 The

resulting word embeddings are then contextualized

for each decade starting 1980 and finishing 2019.5

More specifically, in order to obtain a word vector

representation for a certain decade, we randomly

sample a number of its sentential occurrences6

from that period, then extract contextual words

at the pre-set window size.7 The final sentence-

specific representation is a bag-of-words, i.e. it is

an average over corresponding context words repre-

sentations. To estimate semantic breadth of a word,

we evaluate pair-wise cosine similarities across all

the sentence-specific representations. To reduce

any biases, we repeat the above sampling process

10 times. Fig. 3 shows that concepts behave dif-

ferently over time. For instance, Trauma, although

being more frequently used, has not undergone sig-

nificant changes in its meaning and stayed quite

a “broad” concept. The notion of Harassment, on

4Using https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/
5We only start with 1980s since certain concepts such as

bullying were only introduced in 1970s, and the amount of
data for them is insufficient for such an analysis.

6We set the number to 50
7We set the window size to 7



32



33

the list for each decade. Fig. 5 presents a sam-

ple of nearest neighbors (words with highest co-

sine similarity) at a certain period of time and re-

flects changes of semantics of each concept. For

instance, for Addiction it demonstrates a shift from

substance-related concept in 1980s to behaviour-

related one in 2010s. More specifically, we observe

that it moved from “drug” and “narcotic”-related

meaning towards “gaming”, “internet”, and “smart-

phone”. Bullying has become more “victimized”

and associated with workplace while its similarity

to “school” and “child” stayed the same. Work-

place also started being more related to Harass-

ment, although, at the same time, its meaning ex-

panded towards “cyber” and “online”. Similarly,

for Trauma we observe a shift from “physical” to

“psychological” as well as an increase of a “stress”

meaning. Finally, Prejudice has made strong con-

nections to “discrimination” and “racial” while

overall reduced for “black” and “woman”.

6 Conclusion

The findings of our analyses illuminate and add nu-

ance to our understanding of concept creep within

academic psychology. The LSA-based analysis

indicated that a sample of harm-related concepts

have not undergone a consistent or linear pattern

of semantic broadening. Since the 1990s Addic-

tion, Bullying and Harassment have broadened, as

the theory of concept creep would suggest, but the

breadth of Trauma has been relatively static and

Prejudice has somewhat narrowed. The analysis

of semantic displacement points to a more consis-

tent diachronic pattern: all five concepts changed

most substantially from the 1980s to the 1990s

and changed progressively less thereafter. This

finding implies that the final two decades of the

20th century are especially critical for understand-

ing concept creep. Finally, the analysis of pair-

wise similarities demonstrated changing patterns

of co-occurrence for each concept that clarified

how its meanings have shifted and expanded over

four decades. During this period some concepts

have acquired entirely new associations (e.g., cyber-

harassment), some have added new semantic do-

mains (e.g., Addiction incorporating non-ingestive

behaviors such as gaming and smartphone use),

and others have shifted emphasis (e.g., Trauma be-

coming associated less with physical injury and

more with psychological stress).

The results of the present analyses are in some

respects preliminary. From a methodological stand-

point, future research will need to optimize the

analytic parameters employed in the approaches

examined in this research and evaluate whether

findings derived from these approaches converge

with those using other methods for assessing se-

mantic change. Methods must also be developed to

examine horizontal and vertical concept creep sep-

arately. The methods used in the present research

emphasize “horizontal” changes in the range of se-

mantic contexts in which a concept appears, and

do not adequately capture how meanings may shift

“vertically” to encompass less severe phenomena.

Substantively, our findings should be replicated

with additional hypothetically creeping concepts,

such as “mental illness” and “safety”. The extent

to which expansionary semantic changes are spe-

cific to harm-related concepts rather than general-

ized must also be studied systematically. There is

scope for more focused and finely detailed analy-

ses of semantic shifts in single concepts. Ideally,

future work will explore concept creep in corpora

representing other scholarly disciplines and other

languages. A more fundamental challenge is to

uncover the cultural factors that contribute to the

semantic inflation of harm-related concepts, and to

understand its societal implications.

References

Haim Dubossarsky, Daphna Weinshall, and Eitan
Grossman. 2017. Outta control: Laws of semantic
change and inherent biases in word representation
models. In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 1136–1145.

William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Diachronic word embeddings reveal statisti-
cal laws of semantic change. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), vol-
ume 1, pages 1489–1501.

Nick Haslam. 2016. Concept creep: Psychology’s ex-
panding concepts of harm and pathology. Psycho-
logical Inquiry, 27(1):1–17.

David Jurgens and Keith Stevens. 2009. Event detec-
tion in blogs using temporal random indexing. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Events in Emerg-
ing Text Types, pages 9–16. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Yoon Kim, Yi-I Chiu, Kentaro Hanaki, Darshan Hegde,
and Slav Petrov. 2014. Temporal analysis of lan-
guage through neural language models. ACL 2014,
page 61.



34

Andrey Kutuzov, Lilja Øvrelid, Terrence Szymanski,
and Erik Velldal. 2018. Diachronic word embed-
dings and semantic shifts: a survey. In Proceedings
of the 27th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 1384–1397.

David E. Levari, Daniel T. Gilbert, Timothy D. Wilson,
Beau Sievers, David M. Amodio, and Thalia Wheat-
ley. 2018. Prevalence-induced concept change in hu-
man judgment. Science, 360(6396):1465–1467.

Greg Lukianoff and Jonathan Haidt. 2018. The Cod-
dling of the American Mind: How Good Intentions
and Bad Ideas Are Setting Up a Generation for Fail-
ure. Penguin UK.

Melanie J. McGrath, Kathryn Randall-Dzerdz,
Melissa A. Wheeler, Sean C. Murphy, and Nick
Haslam. 2019. Concept creepers: Individual differ-
ences in harm-related concepts and their correlates.
Personality and Individual Differences, 147:79–84.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.

Steven Pinker. 2018. Enlightenment now: The case for
reason, science, humanism, and progress. Penguin.

Eyal Sagi, Stefan Kaufmann, and Brady Clark. 2009.
Semantic density analysis: Comparing word mean-
ing across time and phonetic space. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Geometrical Models of Natural
Language Semantics, pages 104–111. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Nina Tahmasebi, Lars Borin, and Adam Jatowt. 2018.
Survey of computational approaches to diachronic
conceptual change. CoRR, abs/1811.06278.

Melissa A. Wheeler, Melanie J. McGrath, and Nick
Haslam. 2019. Twentieth century morality: The rise
and fall of moral concepts from 1900 to 2007. PLoS
one, 14(2):e0212267.


