












































 

Abstract 

The focus of this paper is on how to 

compile and analyse a transcribed spoken 

Gulf Pidgin Arabic (GPA) corpus with a 

specific focus on the influence of length of 

stay in the Gulf on foreign expat female 

speakers of GPA. GPA is a simplified 

contact variety of the Arabic language 

used in the Gulf states for communication 

between native Arabic speakers and 

foreign workers and among the workers 

themselves. This study provides a 

quantitative analysis of language variation 

in GPA based on five morpho-syntactic 

features that are related to the length of 

stay in the Gulf: definiteness and 

indefiniteness, coordination, copular 

verbs, pronouns, and agreement in the 

verb phrase and in the noun and adjective 

phrase. Digital recorders and planned 

interviews were used for collecting 

accurate naturalistic data. Through a 

comparative corpus-based analysis of 

approximately 72,000 words spoken by 

GPA female participants, evidence from 

this corpus data indicates that length of 

stay in the Gulf seems to have a little 

effect on informants ‘choice between GPA 

linguistic variants. Newcomers and long-

term resident GPA female speakers in the 

Gulf shift towards Gulf Arabic (GA), the 

lexifier language, in only two features: 

definiteness and use of conjunction 

markers. 

1 Introduction 

The field of corpus linguistics has gained huge 

popularity in recent years. It has become one of 

the most wide-spread methods of linguistic 

investigation not only among the experts, but also 

many researchers who would not consider 

themselves to be corpus linguists have begun to 

apply methods of corpus linguistics to their 

linguistic statements and assumptions. Joseph 

(2004:382) states: ‘we seem to be witnessing as 

well a shift in the way some linguists find and 

utilize data – many papers now use corpora as 

their primary data, and many use internet data’.  

GPA has received relatively little attention in 

the literature apart from a few descriptive works 

such as Albakrawi (2013); Albaqawi (2016); 

Alghamdi (2014); Almoaily (2008, 2012); 

Alshammari  (2010); Al-Azraqi  (2010); Al-

Zubeiry (2015); Avram (2014, 2015); Gomaa 

(2007);  Hobrom (1996);  Næss (2008);  Salem  

(2013);  Smart (1990); and Wiswal (2002).  In this 

paper, we are particularly interested in what a 

corpus of GPA spoken data, ideally in the form of 

recordings aligned with an orthographic Arabic 

transcription, might tell us about the use of 

language. Length of stay in the Gulf and GPA 

language variation will be examined in this study 

from a sociolinguistic point of view, since the 

study of linguistic variation in contact languages 

can make a valuable contribution to the field of 

sociolinguistic variation and change. 

Traditionally, researchers in sociolinguistics were 

not interested in using corpora in their 

Compiling and Analysing a Corpus of Transcribed Spoken Gulf Pidgin Arabic 

 Based on Length of Stay in the Gulf 

 
 

 

Najah Albaqawi, Michael Oakes 

Research Group in Computational Linguistics, University of  Wolverhampton 

 

N.Albaqawi@wlv.ac.uk, Michael.Oakes@wlv.ac.uk 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

mailto:N.Albaqawi@wlv.ac.uk
mailto:Michael.Oakes@wlv.ac.uk


 

investigations (Baker, 2010:1) until 1996 when 

McEnery and Wilson suggested a first possible 

relation with corpora. They showed the value of 

supplementing the qualitative analysis of 

language with quantitative data (McEnery & 

Wilson, 2003). In 2006, McEnery et al. also 

indicated that along with the speed of information 

processing, there are specialised software which 

can classify and select words to look at their 

frequencies between major classes, for example, 

male and female usage.  

This paper will start with a brief definition of 

pidgin and the situation of pidgin Arabic in Saudi 

Arabia. This will be followed by a discussion of 

compiling and analysing a spoken variety of 

Arabic, GPA, and the difficulties associated with 

that. Then we will analyse the impact of the 

number of years of residency by Asian female 

workers located in the Gulf as a potential factor 

conditioning language variation in GPA. The final 

section will provide some conclusions and 

suggestions for future studies on GPA.  

2 Definition of Pidgin  

In this section we will try to give a simple 

definition of pidgin and creole, regardless of the 

diverging views in defining these two contact 

language types. 

Pidgin: Pidgin is defined by Velupillai (2015) 

as “a language that emerges when groups of 

people are in close and repeated contact, and need 

to communicate with each other but have no 

language in common”. McWhorter (2001, 2004) 

also defined pidgins as the languages that result 

from maximal contact and adult language 

learning, and their speakers use them as 

“transitory tools” for passing exchanges. If people 

use this simplified version of language, pidgin, as 

an everyday language, a pidgin can become a real 

language, a creole. 

Usually a pidgin language is a blend of the 

vocabulary of one major language (i.e. language 

of the dominant group which is referred to as the 

‘lexifier’ or ‘superstrate’, in our case GA) with the 

grammar of one or more other languages (i.e. 

languages which are spoken by groups with lesser 

social status to the lexifier speakers which are 

referred to as the ‘substrate languages’. In our 

case they are from the following six different 

language groups: Tagalog, Punjabi, Sinhala, 

Malayalam, Sunda, and Bengali).  

 

3 The Situation of Pidgin Arabic in the 
Gulf States 

The situation in which GPA was developed is a 

textbook case of the situations that create a 

pidginised variety. Sakoda and Siegel (2003:1) 

write: 

Nowadays, the term “pidgin” has a 

different meaning in the field of 

linguistics. It refers to a new language 

that develops in a situation where 

speakers of different languages need to 

communicate but don’t share a common 

language. 

 

According to their definition, the situation in 

the Gulf States is ideal for the birth of a new 

contact language as the Arab Gulf States are 

located in the centre of the Old World1. Following 

the October 1973 “oil boom,” the Arab Gulf 

States (GCC)2 have experienced radical social, 

political and demographic changes in a very short 

time. This has led to an extremely rapid increase 

in the demand for foreign labour. The number of 

foreign labourers in the Gulf countries, especially 

the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, rapidly increased, 

amounting to almost 4.4 million in 1985, a more 

than three-fold increase within a single decade. 

Also, the kingdom is the biggest economy in the 

Arab world, endowed with the world’s second 

largest proven oil reserves. This makes Saudi 

Arabia a major hub for population movements 

(De Bel-Air, 2014). Saudi Arabia, as stated by 

Avram (2013b), has a multilingual setting as do 

all Gulf countries; Gulf Arabic (GA) is a form of 

Colloquial Arabic language spoken by the 

indigenous people of the Gulf Region. Migrant 

workers, who come from various linguistic 

backgrounds and usually do not speak Arabic, 

come into contact with GA speakers as well as 

speakers of other Arabic dialects, and there is an 

urgent need for communication between the two 

groups, “Arabic-speaking locals and expats on 

one hand and non-Arabic speaking expats on the 

other” (Almoaily, 2012, p. 1). Thus, a simplified 

form of Arabic has developed as a result of this 

                                                           
1 Some geographers use the term Old World to refer to Asia, Africa, and Europe (see 

Mundy, Butchart, and Ledger 1992).  

 

2 Gulf Cooperation Council, which includes: Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, 

United Arab Emirates, and Oman 



 

contact which is known as ‘Gulf Pidgin Arabic’ 

(henceforth GPA). GPA is a reduced system of 

language that is used for communication between 

foreign workers and the native speakers of Arabic. 

Indeed, GPA and GA are two distinct forms of 

language, with lexical, phonological, syntactic, 

and morphological differences. At the level of 

phonology, Albaqawi (2016) who conducted a 

study that investigated the phonetic variation 

within GPA spoken by Asian migrant workers in 

the Gulf countries concluded that the basic GPA 

phonetic inventory is either reduced or simplified 

and differences in phonology are limited in GPA 

varieties. However, one vital question should be 

asked: Does a local speaker use GPA when 

he/she is speaking to a GPA speaker? To answer 

this question, Almoaily (2008) asked 77 Saudi 

respondents if they ‘don’t mind using GPA with 

speakers who are not fluent in GA’. Half of the 

Saudi respondents agreed to use GPA with non-

Arabic speaking foreigners (especially among the 

younger generation of locals) and the other half 

either disagreed or strongly disagreed with this 

statement. He also claimed that locals’ use of GPA 

when speaking to GPA speakers was higher than 

50%.  

However, this issue is still a controversial and 

it depends on the quantity and quality of input 

which GPA speakers are daily exposed to the 

superstrate language, GA.    

4 Corpus and Methodology   

When spoken language is addressed, 

traditionally, a corpus linguistics work starts with 

deriving an orthographic transcription from a 

recording of large stretches of speech. The main 

aim of building a spoken language corpus is to 

acquire large amounts of data reflecting the 

natural use of language. Thus, all the data in this 

research are collected via interviews with female 

informants who do not speak Gulf Arabic as their 

first language. In order to examine such data, a 

quantitative variationist analysis of GPA 

variability was used.  In this study we attempt to 

provide a quantitative analysis which aims to 

discover the potential effect of the number of 

years spent in the Gulf on variability in GPA 

morpho-syntax.  

4.1  The Corpus  

The corpus consists of the speech of informants 

participating in interviews which were conducted 

in Saudi Arabia3. To test the influence of the 

length of stay on the GPA female speakers’ 

language variation, face-to-face recorded 

interviews were conducted between the subjects 

and the interviewer (the first author) by using a 

high-quality digital voice recorder4 and ranged 

from 16 to 27 minutes. The data-base consists of 

interviews with 72 GPA speaking female 

informants from six linguistic backgrounds 

(Malayalam, Punjabi, Bengali, Tagalog, Sunda, 

and Sinhala) as these substrate languages are the 

largest number of speakers in Saudi Arabia based 

on the results of the Population Census from De 
Bel-Air (2018).  Half of the data was produced by 

informants who have spent five years or less in 

the Gulf while the other half had spent ten years 

or more in the Gulf at the time the researcher 

interviewed them. This paper seeks to investigate 

whether the long-term residents have actually 

shifted towards GA or not. The structural patterns 

of GA that were collected from the newcomers of 

each language group were compared with those of 

long-term residents (e.g. newly-settled Tagalog 

speakers vs. Tagalog speakers who spent more 

than a decade in the Gulf). In other words, we 

compared their proportional use of GA tokens of 

the morpho-syntctic phenomena investigated in 

this study: Arabic definiteness markers (i.e. the 

prefix al-), Arabic conjunction markers (these 

markers are mostly the free morphemes wa ‘and’, 

laakin ‘but’, and aw ‘or’), object or possessive 

pronoun (i.e. subject pronouns in GA are the free 

morphemes , 1SG ana whereas object and 

possessive pronouns are always bound 

morphemes, 1SG -i.), copula (i.e. the GA copula fi 

is used overtly only in the past and future whereas 

it is covert in the present tense), and agreement in 

the verb phrase and the noun phrase with that 

produced by their newly settled counterparts. We 

opt to examine these morpho-syntactic features as 

we believe that they are adequate to test the 

proposed typological features (reduced inflection; 

reduction of agreement markers in verb and noun 

and adjective agreement, and reduced inventory 

of function words; copulas, definite and indefinite 

                                                           
3 All the interviews were conducted in the Saudi Central Province where Najdi Arabic – a 

sub-dialect of GA – is spoken 

 
4 Olympus vn-7800pc 



 

articles, and pronouns) that might be found in all 

pidgin and creole languages worldwide 

(irrespective of their input languages) see 

Almoaily (2013); Bakker (1995, 2003); Roberts 

and Bresnan (2008); Bakker, Daval-Markussen, 

Muysken, and Parkvall (2011); Sebba (1997); and 

Siegel (2004). 

Counting the lexical features has been excluded 

for two reasons: First, the purpose of this paper is 

to examine the structure of GPA rather than its 

lexicon. Second, vocabulary studies are more 

related to developed languages. For example,  

Malmasi, et al. (2016) identified a set of four 

regional Arabic dialects (Egyptian, Gulf, 

Levantine, North African) and Modern Standard 

Arabic (MSA) which are all native languages 

unlike the GPA which has no natives.  

General principles for the quantification of 

variability above the level of phonology are still a 

matter of debate (Macaulay, 2002). A number of 

researchers have come up with several approaches 

for the quantification of tokens. Some quantify 

them by the number of words as was done by 

Precht (2008) and Cheshire, Kerswill and 

Williams (2005). On the other hand, some 

researchers prefer to quantify them per minute or 

hour of speech in a sociolinguistic interview, as 

was done by Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994). 

In our case, we preferred to calculate the tokens 

per number of words as Almoaily (2013) 

suggested, irrespective of the length of the turn or 

the number of words produced in a minute of 

speech. Our reason was that the informants of our 

study have been exposed to GPA over a period 

ranging from eight months to twenty-five years, 

and newly arrived speakers are expected to speak 

slower than those who have spent more than ten 

years in the Gulf. 

4.2 Transcribing the Interviews  

The first author transcribed the interviews 

herself. It took nearly three hours to transcribe and 

revise only ten minutes of speech. She used 

Express Scribe Transcription Playback 

Software5and transcribed that segment of the 

interview manually6 (since the transcriptions of 

                                                           
5 Professional audio player software designed to assist the transcription of audio 

recordings (Free, cross- platform).  

 

6 Arabic transcription/dictation software tools for non- standard Arabic varieties or 

Arabic-based contact languages are inaccurate and thus were avoided in transcribing the 

data for the current study.  

the whole interviews are in Standard Arabic 

script). 

4.3 Annotation of Counting the Tokens  

In the corpus each variant of a variable is labelled 

with a unique code7. The example below shows a 

code and its meaning: 

Code:  (+روابط- - ) /(روابط) 

Meaning: The conjunction marker is 

present (CONJ +)/ The conjunction marker is 

dropped (CONJ -). 

In order to count and retrieve the tokens from 

the transcribed interviews, we used the AntConc 

software8.  AntConc is one of the best tools for 

analysing a corpus. Froehlich (2015) refers to 

AntConc as a very good toolkit for finding 

patterns in language which would be difficult to 

identify just by reading the text. Figure 1 below 

shows how a transcribed interview appears with 

the AntConc program:  

 

 
 
Figure 1: Old Tagalog corpus 

 

 

We tried to find the frequency of occurrence for 

every linguistic feature chosen in the study (e.g. 

definiteness). The Concordance view showed 

whenever the chosen linguistic feature (e.g. 

definiteness) appeared in our corpus (e.g. Tagalog 

corpus newcomers) and some context of it (such 

as a window of x words). We did the same for all 

the corpus files that we had. We then calculated 

the percentage of tokens produced in every 

variant.  

                                                           
7 We used Arabic characters as a unique code. 

8 A freeware corpus analysis toolkit for concordancing and text analysis. 



 

To compare the use of the given variant by 

members of a sub- group with that of other sub-

groups (e.g. newly-settled female Tagalog 

speakers vs. long-term female Tagalog residents), 

the researchers used statistical analysis to look at 

the differences between two corpora. 

  This was used to establish the significance of 

the effect of the years of residency in the Gulf on 

variation in GPA. 

5 Issues in Compiling and Analysing a 
Spoken Corpus 

This study depends on using a suitable corpus 

and since GPA is only a spoken variety of the 

Arabic language, there was no such corpus 

previously available in electronic form. In 

addition, the GPA corpus is different from Arabic 

Learner Corpus as in Alfaifi and Atwell (2013).  

In the Arabic Learner Corpus, the students are all 

trying to learn Standard Arabic, while in the GPA 

corpus, the target language, whether GA or GPA, 

is a matter of debate. Thus, we had to design and 

build our own corpus. A number of difficulties 

and challenges were associated with 

implementing such a corpus. These included, size, 

balance (choosing informants), 

representativeness, and annotation. We will 

discuss the question of annotation here. 

Annotation: Annotating a corpus written in 

Arabic script presents challenges. Many dialects 

are written in different scripts, have no 

conventions for spelling and no large body of 

literature. In our case we have “code-mixed” text, 

interspersed with other languages (Arabic and 

English). As a first attempt, we labelled each 

variant of a variable with a unique Roman code 

(e.g. CONJ+ if the conjunction is used and CONJ- 

if the conjunction is dropped). This attempt failed 

because the AntConc software was not able to 

detect accurately the linguistic code switching 

within Arabic script text as Arabic script starts 

from right-to-left where English Roman script 

starts from left-to-right. To overcome these 

systematic changes in writing direction, we 

decided to retranscribe all our corpus files in a 

unified spelling system by using Arabic code 

instead of Roman code for the annotation (e.g. 

 the +الفعل الرابط the copula is used and  -الفعل الرابط

copula is dropped). This revised annotation works 

very well and it has been adopted in the main 

corpus. 

6 Results and Discussion 

6.1 New versus Old participants  

Each language group was split into two groups 

based on their length of stay in Saudi Arabia, or 

any other GA speaking country (5 years or less— 

referred to as “New” or 10 years or more— 

referred to as “Old”). Chi-squared tests were run 

to establish the significance of the effect of years 

of residency in the Gulf on variation in GPA.  

Results of simple concordance comparisons of 

the new and old participants are presented in 

Table 1. Comparing the percentages of occurrence 

of each variable gives us the opportunity to 

contrast the proportion of use of the GA variants 

as opposed to the proportion of use of the GPA 

variants. 

These were variants in definiteness, 

conjunction markers, the copula, object and 

possessive pronouns and agreement in the VP and 

in the NP and in the ADJP presented in table 1 

and Figure 2: 

 

GA Linguistics Feature GPA Informants 

new old 

Definiteness 10.7% 33.7% 

Conjunction Markers 12.9% 41.5% 

Copula Fi 54.7% 59.2% 

Object and Possessive Pronouns 18% 22.9% 

Subject-Verb Agreement 5.2% 8.4% 

Nominal Agreement 19.3% 26.6.% 

 
Table 1: Concordance and percentage used in the 

corpus of the new and old participants  

 

 

 



 

 
 

Figure 2: Data Comparison between New and Old 

GPA speakers 

 

6.2 Variation in Definiteness 

We noticed a possible link between the length 

of stay in GA speaking countries and the use of 

the definiteness marker al-. This shift towards GA 

was seen in all six language groups. The newly- 

arrived GPA speakers produced the definiteness 

marker in 10.7% of the cases, whereas the old 

members produced them in 33.7%. The chi- 

squared test revealed that the difference between 

the new informants and those who stayed longer 

in the Gulf in producing definiteness markers is 

significant at a p-value of 0.002.This noticeable 

shift towards using the GA definiteness marker 

among the long-term residents could potentially 

be a result of the fact that definiteness in GA is 

one of the morpho-syntactic features that are 

easiest to learn as it only involves adding the 

prefix al – or one of its allophones – to the target 

noun. 

6.3  Variation in the Use of Conjunction 
Markers  

The data reveals a major shift towards GA in 

the use of conjunction markers. This effect was 

seen in all six language groups. The newly- 

arrived GPA speakers produced conjunction 

markers in 12.9% of the cases, whereas the old 

informants produced them in 41.5%. The chi-

square test reveals that the difference between the 

new informants and those who stayed longer in 

the Gulf in producing conjunction markers is 

significant at a p-value of 0.001. This significant 

difference could be due to the fact that learning 

GA conjunction markers is not hard. GA 

conjunction markers are free morphemes (e.g. wa 

‘and’, and aw ‘or’). This result is in parallel with 

Almoaily (2013)’s study of male GPA speakers. 

6.4 Variation in the Use of the Copula 

In GA, there is no copula in the present tense. 

Thus, the focus here is on the use of the copula fi 

in the present tense in GPA. If long-term residents 

are found to drop the copula more than the 

newcomers, this might be an indication of a shift 

towards GA. The data reveals that the relation 

between the years of stay and the shift towards 

GA seems to be slightly negative at a p-value = 

0.35. Overall, there is no significant shift towards 

Gulf Arabic in the data of speakers participating 

in this study regarding the use of a copula, as new 

speakers dropped it on average 54.7% of the time 

and old speakers dropped it in 59.2% of the time. 

6.5 Variation in the Use of the Object and 
Possessive Pronouns 

GA personal pronouns inflect for number, 

person, and gender. In GPA, there are four 

variants for object and possessive pronouns: GA 

bound pronoun which agrees with the noun in 

person, number, and gender, GA bound pronoun 

which does not agree with the noun, free pronoun, 

and dropping the object or possessive pronoun. 

On average, newly-settled informants in all six 

language groups produced bound object and 

possessive pronouns in 24.2% of the cases, while 

the long-term residents produced them in 49.2% 

of the cases. The difference is significant at a p-

value of 0.0001. Note that the newcomers 

produced tokens of pronouns in free forms 71% 

of the time and the old group counterparts 

produced them 75.5% of the time. In fact, this 

high rate of free object and possessive pronouns 

indicates that the overall shift is clearly not 

towards GA (bound pronouns) but GPA (free 

pronouns). Since this feature (free pronoun) is 

found in the informants’ L1s, it could probably 

have some influence on GPA speakers and lead 

them to learn it at the first stage as reported in 

Almoaily (2012).  

6.6 Variation in Subject-verb Agreement 

In Gulf Arabic, the verb inflects for gender, 

number, tense, and person (Feghali, 2004). The 

data shows that there is a positive development 

related to the informant’s length-of-stay in the use 

of verbs: members of the new group tend to drop 

verbs more frequently (35.6%) than their old 

group counterparts (8.4%). The rate of dropping 

the verb is significantly higher in the data of new 

informants at a p-value of 0.0002. However, it 



 

seems that there is no development in acquiring 

agreement in the GA verbal system. Overall, the 

data revealed that all of the informants rarely 

produced the form of the verb that is used in GA 

(i.e. fully inflected verb forms that agree with the 

subject in number, gender, and person). Compare 

the overall percentage of new-comers who 

produced a fully inflected GA verb only in 5.2% 

of the total number of tokens, with that of old 

informants who produced it in 8.4%. Yet, the 

difference is not significant (p-value= 0.22). Note, 

the overall shift is clearly not towards GA, as the 

use of forms of verb markers which do not agree 

with the noun in gender, number, and person are 

predominant in the data of both new and old 

speakers. 

6.7 Agreement in the NP and in the ADJP 

In GA, the adjectives agree with the head noun 

in gender, number, and definiteness (Feghali 

2004, Smart 1990, Almoaily 2008). The data 

show that there is a little positive improvement in 

the occurrence of nominal agreement by the 

participants who stay long in the Gulf as 

compared to their new counterparts. We have 

noticed that long-term residents produce a few 

more tokens of noun-adjective agreement in 

number and gender than their new counterparts. 

The new informants produced agreement tokens 

in 19.3% of the total number of cases, while their 

long-term counterparts produced it in 26.6 % of 

the total number of cases. Although the difference 

is not statistically significant (p-value = 0.08), and 

even though there is obviously a vast amount of 

variation within the groups, there seems to be a 

trend towards the acquisition of GA norms. 

 

7 Conclusion 

The main aim of this study was to examine 

how to build and analyse a spoken corpus for a 

sociolinguistic investigation. Indeed, we expected 

to face difficulties when deciding on size, balance, 

representativeness, and annotation of our spoken 

corpus. Compiling and analysing the corpus for 

this investigation were the most demanding task 

and time-consuming task (see section 5). First, 

choosing GPA speakers who meet certain criteria 

and convincing them to participate in the 

interview was not an easy task. Many simply 

refused to be interviewed and many others were 

too busy to take part in this study. Also, 

transcribing the interviews and choosing the 

appropriate transcription protocol for Arabic 

script presented greater challenges. The strategy 

we employed to overcome, or lessen the impact of 

these problems was by transcribing all our corpus 

files in a unified spelling system by using Arabic 

code instead of Roman code. It was very fruitful 

technique (see section 4). 

The study also was aimed to investigate 

language variation in GPA resulting from the 

speakers’ length of stay in the Gulf. The analysis 

suggests that this factor seems to have a little 

effect on informants ‘choice between GPA 

linguistic variants. We expected long-residence 

speakers to produce more GA tokens than the 

newly-settled GPA speakers. They have made a 

significant shift to GA after spending ten years in 

the Gulf in two linguistic features only: 

definiteness and conjunction (p-value=0.002, p-

value=0.001) respectively. There are some factors 

which we believe could have had an effect on the 

informants’ choice between the selected features’ 

variants. This could potentially be a result of the 

fact that most of the informants are female maids 

living with a local family who mostly use GA 

when communicating with them, which could 

play a major role on the process of acquiring a 

language. This in turn leads them to rapidly learn 

the language of the host community and 

effortlessly adopt the system of Gulf Arabic (the 

target language). Another effect on the 

informants’ choice between the selected feature 

variants is that it may depend more on the amount 

of GA input that GPA speakers receive during 

their stay in the Gulf (rather than the language of 

origin), different learning abilities to learn a 

language, and motivation. 

 We conclude this study with a set of 

recommendations for future research on this 

pidgin language. First, we suggest considering the 

role of input in pidgin formation. Second, we will 

conduct a comparison study to investigate male 

and female GPA production and effect of the 

language of the origin. Finally, it would be fruitful 

to conduct and computationally analyse more 

data-based studies of Arabic-based pidgins which 

are less known in the literature of non-Indo-

European pidgin languages.  

 

 



 

 

References  

 

Abdullah Alfaifi and Eric S. Atwell. 2013. Arabic 

learner corpus v1: A new resource for arabic 

language research. Leeds. 

Abdul-Qadir Wiswall. 2002. Gulf pidgin: An 

expanded analysis, unpublished pro-seminar paper, 

Ohio State University. 

Andrei A. Avram. 2013b. On the periphery of the 

periphery: Gulf Pidgin Arabic. Proceedings of 10th 

Conference of Association Internationale de 

Dialectologie Arabe. Qatar University, Doha.  

Andrei A. Avram. 2015. On the developmental stage 

of Gulf Pidgin Arabic. In Arabic varieties: Far and 

wide. Proceedings of the 11th International 

Conference of AIDA (p.87-98). Bucharest, 

Romania. 

Andrei A. Avram. A. 2014. Immigrant Workers and 

Language Formation: Gulf Pidgin Arabic. Lengua 

y Migración, 6 (2). 7- 40.  

Ashraf A. Salem. 2013. Linguistic Features of Pidgin 

Arabic in Kuwaiti. English Language Teaching, 6 

(5). 105-110.  

Brian Joseph. 2004. On change in Language and 

change in language. Language, 80(3), 381-383.  

David. Evans. 2007. Corpus building and 

investigation for the Humanities. University of 

Nottingham http://www. corpus. bham. ac. 

uk/corpus-building. shtml.  

Emad A. Alghamdi. 2014. Gulf Pidgin Arabic: A 

Descriptive and Statistical Analysis of Stability. 

International Journal of Linguistics 6, no. 6, p.110. 

Françoise De Bel-Air. 2014. Demography, Migration 

and Labour Market in Saudi Arabia. Gulf Research 

Center Knowledge for All. Retrieved from 

http://gulfmigration.eu/media/pubs/exno/GLMM_ 

EN_2014_01.pdf.  

Françoise De Bel-Air. 2018. Demography, migration 

and labour market in Saudi Arabia. 

Gisle Andersen. 2010. How to use corpus linguistics 

in sociolinguistics, in O'Keeffe A. & M. McCarthy 

(ads.), The Routledge handbook of corpus 

linguistics, 547-62. 1" ed. London: Routledge.  

Gomaa, Y. 2007. Arabic Pidginization: The Case of 

Pidgin in Saudi Arabic. Journal of the Faculty of 

Arts, 19, 85-120, Assiut University, Egypt. 

Habaka J. Feghali. 2004. Gulf Arabic: the dialects of 

Riyadh and eastern Saudi Arabia: grammar, 

dialogues, and lexicon. Springfield, VA, Dunwoody 

Press. 

 Hameed Y. Al-Zubeiry. 2015. Linguistic Analysis of 

Saudi Pidginized Arabic as Produced by Asian 

Foreign Expatriates. International Journal of 

Applied Linguistics & English Literature, 2(4), 47-

53. 

Heather Froehlich. 2015. Corpus analysis with 

AntConc. Programming Historian.  

Hussien Albakrawi. 2012. The linguistic effect of 

foreign Asian workers on the Arabic Pidgin in 

Saudi Arabia. language 2, no. 9.  

Jack R. Smart. 1990. Pidginization in Gulf Arabic: A 

first report. Anthropological Linguistics, 32, 83-

118. 

Jeff Siegel. 2004. Morphological Simplicity in 

Pidgins and Creoles, Journal of Pidgin and Creole 

Languages, 19: 139–62. 

Jenny Cheshire, Paull Kerswill, and Ann Williams. 

2005. Phonology, Grammar and Discourse in 

Dialect Convergence. In: Peter Auer, France 

Hinskens, and Paull Kerswill (eds). Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press.  

John H. McWhorter. 2004. The story of human 

language (Course Guidebook). Chantilly, VA: The 

Teaching Company.  

John R. Rickford and Faye McNair-Knox. 1994. 

Addressee and Topic Influenced Style Shift: a 

quantitative sociolinguistic study. In: Douglas 

Biber and Edward Finegan, (eds). Oxford: Oxford 

University Press.  

Kent Sakoda and Jeff Siegel. 2003. Pidgin grammar: 

An introduction to the creole English of Hawai'i. 

Honolulu, Hawaii: Bess Press.  

Kristen Precht. 2008.  Sex Similarities and 

Differences in Stance in Informal American 

Conversation, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 12 (1) 

89-111.  

Mark Sebba. 1997. Contact Languages: pidgins and 

creoles. London, Macmillan. 

 Mohammad Almoaily. 2008. A data-based 

description of Urdu Pidgin Arabic. Unpublished 

MA dissertation, Newcastle University. 

Mohammad AlMoaily. 2012. Language Variation in 

Gulf Pidgin Arabic (Doctoral dissertation). 

Newcastle University, the United Kingdom.  

Munira Al-Azraqi. 2011. Pidginisation in the eastern 

region of Saudi Arabia: Media presentation. In 

Arabic and the Media, pp. 159-173. Brill. 



 

 

 Najah S. Albaqawi. 2016. Unity and Diversity within 

Pidginized Arabic as Produced by Asian Migrant 

Workers in the Arabian Gulf. 

Natalie Schilling-Estes. 2007. Sociolinguistic 

Fieldwork. In: Robert Bayley and Ceil Lucas, 

(eds.) Sociolinguistic Variation Theories, Methods, 

and Applications: Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press.  

Peter Bakker, Aymeric Daval-Markussen, Mikael 

Parkvall, and Ingo Plag. 2011. Creoles are 

Typologically Distinct from Noncreoles, Journal of 

Pidgin and Creole Languages, 26 (1) pp. 5-42. 

Peter Bakker. 1995. Pidgins. In Jacques Arends,  

Pieter Muysken , and Norval Smith (eds) Pidgins 

and creoles an introduction.1995. Amsterdam; 

Philadelphia: J. Benjamins. 

Peter Bakker. 2003. Pidgin inflectional morphology 

and its implications for creole morphology, 

Yearbook of Morphology, Part 1, 3-33. 

R Core Team. 2013. R: A language and environment 

for statistical computing. R Foundation for 

Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL 

http://www.R-project.org/.  

Robert Bayley and Dennis R. Preston. 1996. Second 

Language Acquisition and Linguistic Variation. 

Amsterdam: Benjamins.  

Ronald Macaulay. 2002. Discourse Variation. In: Jack 

K. Chambers, Peter Trudgill, and Natalie Schilling-

Estes (eds.) The handbook of language Variation 

and change. New York: Blackwell Publishing Co.  

Sean Wallis. 2014. What might a corpus of parsed 

spoken data tell us about language. In Complex 

Visibles Out There. Proceedings of the Olomouc 

Linguistics Colloquium (pp. 641-662).  

Sarah J. Roberts and Joan Bresnan. 2008. Retained 

Inflectional Morphology in Pidgins: A typological 

study, Linguistic Typology 12: 269–302. 

Shervin Malmasi, Marcus Zampieri, Nikola Ljubešić, 

Preslav Nakov, Ahmed Ali, and Jörg Tiedemann. 

2016. Discriminating between similar languages 

and arabic dialect identification: A report on the 

third dsl shared task. In Proceedings of the Third 

Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Varieties 

and Dialects (VarDial3) (pp. 1-14). 

Tony McEnery, Richard  Xiao, and Yukio  Tono. 

2006. Corpus- based language studies: An 

advanced resource book. Taylor & Francis.  

T-Wilson McEnery and A Wilson. 1996. Corpus 

Linguistics Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 

Press.  

T-Wilson McEnery and A Wilson. 2003. Corpus 

linguistics. The Oxford handbook of computational 

linguistics, 448-463.  

Viveka Velupillai. 2015. Pidgins, Creoles and Mixed 

Languages. An Introduction. Amsterdam and 

Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  

Wafi Alshammari. 2010. An Investigation into 

Morpho-syntactic Simplification in the Structure of 

Arabic Based Pidgin in Saudi Arabia (Master’s 

theses). Mu'tah University, Jordan. 

William Labov. 1972. Language in the Inner City; 

studies in the Black English vernacular. 

Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


	1 Introduction
	2 Definition of Pidgin
	3 The Situation of Pidgin Arabic in the Gulf States
	4 Corpus and Methodology
	4.1  The Corpus
	4.2 Transcribing the Interviews
	4.3 Annotation of Counting the Tokens

	5 Issues in Compiling and Analysing a Spoken Corpus
	6 Results and Discussion
	6.1 New versus Old participants
	6.2 Variation in Definiteness
	6.3  Variation in the Use of Conjunction Markers
	6.4 Variation in the Use of the Copula
	6.5 Variation in the Use of the Object and Possessive Pronouns
	6.6 Variation in Subject-verb Agreement
	6.7 Agreement in the NP and in the ADJP

	7 Conclusion
	References

