



















































TCL - a Lexicon of Turkish Discourse Connectives


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 73–81
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

73

TCL - A Lexicon of Turkish Discourse Connectives

Deniz Zeyrek
Graduate School of Informatics

Middle East Technical University
Ankara, Turkey

dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr

Kezban Başıbüyük
Department of Computer Engineering

Middle East Technical University
Ankara, Turkey

kezban.demirtas@metu.edu.tr

Abstract
It is known that discourse connectives are
the most salient indicators of discourse rela-
tions. State-of-the-art parsers being developed
to predict explicit discourse connectives ex-
ploit annotated discourse corpora but a lexi-
con of discourse connectives is also needed
to enable further research in discourse struc-
ture and support the development of language
technologies that use these structures for text
understanding. This paper presents a lexicon
of Turkish discourse connectives built by au-
tomatic means. The lexicon has the format
of the German connective lexicon, DiMLex,
where for each discourse connective, informa-
tion about the connective‘s orthographic vari-
ants, syntactic category and senses are pro-
vided along with sample relations. In this pa-
per, we describe the data sources we used and
the development steps of the lexicon.

1 Introduction

Discourse connectives (alternatively labelled as
cue phrases, discourse markers, discourse opera-
tors, etc.) are lexical anchors of coherence rela-
tions. Such relations (with semantic labels such as
expansion, contingency, contrast, concession) can
be signalled with discourse connectives, but lan-
guages vary in the way they express them. For
example, while languages like English and Ger-
man express discourse relations lexically (with
conjunctions and adverbials), Turkish conveys dis-
course relations through morphological suffixes,
as well as lexically. Languages also diverge in the
number of connectives that express the same dis-
course relation. For example, French and Dutch
differ in the number of connectives that convey
causal relations (Zufferey and Degand, 2017). Fi-
nally, discourse connectives are polysemous, ex-
pressing several discourse relations. These is-
sues are an obvious challenge for language tech-
nologies, translation studies and language learn-
ers. What is needed is a resource that goes beyond

traditional dictionaries. Our goal in this paper is
to reveal the nature of Turkish discourse connec-
tives through discourse-annotated corpora and de-
scribe the steps in constructing a discourse con-
nective lexicon that hosts the connectives’ various
properties. The Turkish Lexicon will ultimately be
part of the connective lexicon database (http://
connective-lex.info/) that aims to syn-
chronize the lexicons that exist.

The interest in discourse connectives goes
hand in hand with the development of discourse-
annotated corpora. There are three major ap-
proaches that have guided discourse research and
inspired other languages to annotate discourse:
RST (Mann and Thompson, 1988), SDRT (2012),
and the PDTB (Prasad et al., 2014). Our focus in
this paper will be the PDTB, one of the best known
resources for English discourse. The PDTB takes
discourse connectives (henceforth, DCs) as two-
place predicates where argumenthood is based
on abstract objects (eventualities, facts, proposi-
tions, etc.) as in Asher (1993). It annotates the
DC together with its binary arguments, which are
semantic representations of discourse parts (cf.
(Danlos, 2009)). The PDTB-style annotation has
been extended to various languages other than En-
glish, namely, Arabic (Al-Saif and Markert, 2010),
Chinese (Zhou and Xue, 2015), Hindi (Kolachina
et al., 2012), and Turkish (Demirşahin and Zeyrek,
2017) as well as a recent multilingual resource,
TED-Multilingual Discourse Bank, or TED-MDB
(Zeyrek et al., 2019).

In addition to these efforts, there has been
an important initiative, namely DiMLex, the dis-
course connective lexicon first developed for Ger-
man (Stede and Umbach, 1998; Scheffler and
Stede, 2016), which has subsequently been ex-
tended to multiple languages, e.g. French (Roze
et al., 2012), Italian (Feltracco et al., 2016), Por-
tuguese (Mendes et al., 2018) and recently Eng-
DiMLex for English (Das et al., 2018). Such lex-

http://connective-lex.info/
http://connective-lex.info/


74

icons are sure to complement the ongoing efforts
of discourse-annotated corpora, support discourse
research and various language technology applica-
tions such as discourse parsers.

In this paper, we describe the development of
TCL, a lexicon for Turkish discourse connectives,
which follows the format of DiMLex. To the best
of our knowledge, there is no such resource for
Turkish. Thus, our aim is to fill this gap with
a resource that covers Turkish discourse connec-
tives with their various properties and a represen-
tation of their meanings. This resource will not
only benefit discourse studies in Turkish but will
also form the basis of future multilingual studies
on discourse connectives and their meanings.

In the rest of this paper, we describe the steps in
creating the TCL. In Section 2, we provide infor-
mation about the data sources we used and in Sec-
tion 3, we discuss the criteria for selecting connec-
tives as TCL entries. Section 4 presents the struc-
ture of TCL and Section 5 shows how the lexicon
is populated. Section 6 brings the paper to an end
and draws some conclusions.

2 Data Sources

In building the TCL, we use three PDTB-
inspired annotated corpora to compile explicit
DCs, namely, Turkish Discourse Bank or TDB 1.0
(Zeyrek et al., 2013), TDB 1.1 (Zeyrek and Kur-
falı, 2017), and the Turkish section of TED-MDB.

• TDB 1.0 is a 400,000-word resource of
modern written Turkish containing annota-
tions of explicit DCs and the discourse seg-
ments they relate. It also annotates “phrasal
expressions” such as bunun için ‘for this
(reason/purpose)’, which are linking devices
compositionally derived from postpositions
(için ‘since/in order to’) and a deictic term.
They are a subset of the PDTB’s alternative
lexicalizations and correspond to “secondary
connectives” (Danlos et al., 2018). We used
8439 relations (explicit DCs and “phrasal ex-
pressions”) from this corpus.

• TDB 1.1 is a 40,000-word-subset of TDB
1.0, where all five relation types of the PDTB
are annotated together with their binary argu-
ments (i.e., explicit and implicit relations, al-
ternative lexicalizations, entity relations and
no relations). Based on the PDTB-3 rela-
tion hierarchy (Lee et al., 2016), the senses

of explicit and implicit connectives as well as
alternative lexicalizations are annotated. We
used 912 explicit relations from this corpus.

• TED-MDB is a corpus of TED talks tran-
scripts in 6 languages (English, German, Pol-
ish, European Portuguese, Russian and Turk-
ish). We used 276 explicit relations from
the Turkish section of this corpus. TDB 1.0
and TED-MDB annotation files are in pipe-
delimited format, the TDB 1.1 annotation
files are in XML format.

By using different resources, we take advan-
tage of the different coverage of the three corpora.
As expected, while some of the connectives exist
in all of the data sources, some connectives (and
the information needed for the connective lexicon
database) may exist in only one source (see Ta-
ble 2). Moreover, resorting to different corpora is
helpful as different corpora may spot new senses
of a DC. For example, different senses of the post-
positions gibi ‘as’ and kadar ‘until/as well as/as
much as’ have been compiled from different cor-
pora as indicated in Table 1.

3 The criteria for selection of connectives
as TCL entries

Turkish is a morphologically rich, agglutinating
language with suffixes added to the word root in
the order licensed by the morphology and syn-
tax of the language. In this section we describe
the major syntactic categories we used to deter-
mine DCs, and how we represent suffixal con-
nectives (converbs) in TCL. We also explain our
method of determining the syntactic category of
other DCs when different POS taggers provide dif-
ferent parses.

TCL only considers explicit discourse connec-
tives annotated in the existing Turkish discourse-
annotated corpora. Unlike other DC lexicons such
as DimLex and the lexicon of Czech discourse
connectives (Mı́rovskỳ et al., 2017) it does not
record non-connective usages.

3.1 Major syntactic categories
DCs are determined on the basis of the following
syntactic categories:

• Conjunctions, comprising both the single
type ama ‘but/yet’ and the paired or noncon-
tinuous type such as ne . . . ne ‘neither . . .
nor’.



75

TCL Entries TDB 1.1 TED-MDB
gibi ‘as’ EXPANSION: Conjunction COMPARISON: Similarity

EXPANSION: Manner: Arg2-as-manner
kadar ‘until/as well/much as’ COMPARISON: Degree COMPARISON: Similarity

TEMPORAL: Asynchronous: Precedence CONTINGENCY: Purpose: Arg2-as-goal
artık ‘no longer’ EXPANSION: Level-of-detail: Arg2-as-detail CONTINGENCY: Cause: Result

TEMPORAL: Synchronous

Table 1: Different senses of connectives captured via discourse-annotated corpora in Turkish

TCL Entries Data Sources
TDB 1.0 TDB 1.1 TED-MDB

ama ‘but/yet’ ama ama ama
çünkü ‘because’ Çünkü Çünkü çünkü
aksine ‘in contrast’ aksine aksine
sadece ‘only’ sadece
sayesinde ‘thanks to’ sayesinde
keza ‘as well’ Keza Keza
dahası ‘furthermore’ Dahası Dahası

Table 2: TCL entries obtained from various discourse-
annotated corpora

• Subordinators:

– Converbs (simplex subordinators), e.g.
–sA, ‘if’, -(y)ArAk ‘by means of/ and’.

– Postpositions (complex subordinators),
which involve an accompanying suffix
on the (non-finite) verb of the subordi-
nate clause, gibi ’as’.

• Adverbs, involving single tokens such as
ayrıca ‘in addition’ as well as phrasal tokens,
e.g. ne var ki ‘even so’.1

3.2 Representing suffixal connectives
In Turkish, suffixal connectives are essentially
converbs forming non-finite adverbial clauses.
Converbs have complex allomorphy based on
vowel harmony as well as consonant harmony
(Zeyrek and Webber, 2008). We decided that
such variation has to be represented in TCL. To
illustrate, -(y)ArAk ‘by means of/and’ is a con-
verb shown in the standard morphological nota-
tion, where the capital letters indicate alternation
(-erek, -arak) and the parentheses show that y is
needed if the verb root ends in a vowel (see exam-
ples (1), (2), (3)). Other converbs may additionally
carry dedicated nominalization markers or person
agreement markers, which have different morpho-
logical realizations. To identify all occurrences of
a converb, the allomorphs need to be specified in

1We note that the TDB‘s term “phrasal expression” is dif-
ferent from the DimLex term “phrasal connective”, which
refers to discourse connectives that involve more than one
words without specifying the type of words involved in the
composition of the connective.

the lexicon. By means of the TCL search tool (see
5.1 below), we specified 15 converbs and their al-
lomorphs to be added to TCL. If any allomorph of
a specific converb was missing in the corpora we
used, those allomorphs were added manually.

(1) Ali okula gid-erek öğretmenle görüştü. 2
‘Ali went to school and talked with the
teacher.’

(2) Ali sıkı çalış-arak başarı kazandı.
‘Ali gained success by working hard.’

(3) Ali şarkı söyle-yerek başarı kazandı.
‘Ali gained success by singing.’

3.3 Noun-based connectives

Turkish has a group of connectives which are the
lexicalized forms of nominal roots, e.g. dahası
‘furthermore’, amacıyla ‘with the aim of’, sonuçta
‘eventually.’ For this group of connectives, the
available POS taggers sometimes provide incom-
plete information. Table 3 shows different parses
provided by different POS parsers for these con-
nectives.

Connectives UDPipe TRmorph
dahası ‘furthermore’ Noun Cnj:adv, Adv
amacıyla ‘for the purpose of’ Noun Noun
sonuçta ‘eventually’ Adv Adv, Noun

Table 3: Different parses for three noun-based DCs

In such cases, we compare different sources to
determine the connective’s syntactic category for
TCL. For example, for the connectives in Table 3,
we settled on the syntactic categories provided in
Table 4.

2As in the PDTB, Arg2 is the discourse part that hosts
the connective and in the examples, it is shown in bold fonts.
Arg1 is the other argument and it is rendered in italics. The
discourse connective is underlined.



76

Connectives TCL
dahası ‘furthermore‘ Adv
amacıyla ‘for the purpose of‘ Other
sonuçta ‘eventually‘ Adv

Table 4: Syntactic categories of three noun-based DCs in
TCL

4 The structure of TCL

The TCL structure is based on the structure of the
connective lexicon database. Thus, it contains the
following components.

• Orthographical variants: This criterion
specifies whether the connective is a sin-
gle token (part=single) or a phrasal to-
ken (part=phrasal); continuous (orth=cont)
or discontinuous (orth=discount). For exam-
ple, the phrasal connective ne...ne ‘neither . . .
nor’ is annotated as “discont” while the con-
nective öte yandan ‘on the other hand’ is an-
notated as “cont”. An entry illustrating the
orthogrophical variants of the single connec-
tive ama ‘but’ is provided in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Variants of ama ‘but/yet’

In addition to these, we added the type “suf-
fixal” to TCL to indicate converbs.

• Canonical Form: The canonical form of a
connective is the most commonly used vari-
ant of that connective. For example, the
canonical form of çünkü ‘because‘ is the
sentence-initial Çünkü, a property which is
determined by the TCL search tool.

• Frequency: The frequency of the connective
shows both how often it occurs in the corpora
and the frequency of each of its sense tags.

• Syntactic category: The syntactic category of
connectives is assigned using several sources
as described in Section 5.1, namely the Turk-
ish section of UDPipe 3, the search tool pro-

3http://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/services/udpipe/

Figure 2: Main window of the TCL search tool

vided in the Turkish Linguistic Society web-
site or TDK 4 and TRmorph 5.

5 Populating the lexicon

5.1 The TCL search tool
We developed a search tool to populate TCL. The
search tool was developed using the C# program-
ming language. It is also extendable with new
features. The main feature of the tool is that
it searches different corpora to retrieve DCs (see
Figure 2 for a snapshot of the main window of the
tool). In addition, it uses filters for DC types, such
as suffixal, single, and phrasal. When the search
tool is started, file paths used by the tool are spec-
ified in the data path window, namely, the path of
the text directory specifying the raw text files that
will be searched, and the path of the annotation di-
rectory containing the XML or pipe-delimited files
storing the annotation information.

5.2 The workflow
Using the search tool, we populated the TCL en-
tries. Our work flow involves several steps, as de-
scribed below and summarized in Figure 3.

• Firstly, the annotation files of the three cor-
pora are parsed and the relations encoded by
explicit connectives are retrieved. For this
purpose, an XML parser and a pipe-delimited
file parser have been developed.

• Relation Builder: The Relation Builder mod-
ule reads the connective and its sense(s) in
each relation directly from the annotation
files while it reads the respective relation

4http://www.tdk.gov.tr
5http://coltekin.net/cagri/trmorph/



77

Figure 3: Flow of populating TCL entries

spans from the text files; then it distinguishes
suffixal DCs from non-suffixal DCs, i.e. all
other types of DCs. To characterize a DC as
suffixal, the Relation Builder simply checks
the character preceding the DC token. If the
previous character is white space, a new line,
or a separator (. , : ; ! ? ( ) ‘ “ -), the connec-
tive is labeled as Not Suffixal; in other cases,
it is labeled as Suffixal. Hence, two lists of re-
lations are formed, a list of relations contain-
ing suffixal connectives and a list of relations
containing non-suffixal connectives.

• DC Lexicon Entry Builder: Using the two
lists of relations from the Relation Builder,
this module computes the following proper-
ties for each DC to be represented in the lex-
icon:

– Orthographical Variants: Since suffixal
connectives are uniform in terms of or-
thography, continuity, etc. they do not
have variants. Therefore, the DC Lexi-
con Entry Builder only searches the list
of non-suffixal relations to determine
the variants of all connectives. Suffixal
connectives are simply tagged as ”suf-
fixal”.

– Allomorphs: To handle the allomorphs
of converbs, the list of suffixal relations
is used. The entries of this list are ana-
lyzed to find out which entries are allo-
morphs of a suffixal DC.

– Continuity: Phrasal DCs can be con-
tinuous or discontinuous. This prop-
erty is specified automatically by go-
ing through the multi-word connectives
in the list of non-suffixal relations, and
whether there are any words between
the two parts of the connective is deter-
mined.

– Canonical Use: The DC Lexicon Entry
Builder counts the times each variant of
a DC occurs in our relation lists and la-
bels the most frequently used variant as
canonical.

– Frequency: To set the frequency prop-
erty, the DC Lexicon Entry Builder uses
both lists of relations and computes the
number of occurrences of a DC as well
as the number of occurrences of each
sense of the DC.

• Syntactic Category Tagger: This module as-
signs a syntactic category to each DC. If a
connective is suffixal, it is assigned the con-
verb category. The syntactic category of non-
suffixal connectives is determined on the ba-
sis of the available POS taggers to the ex-
tent possible, otherwise by comparing vari-
ous parses as described in Section 4 above.

Some of the connectives may belong to more
than one syntactic category (Zeyrek and Kur-
falı, 2018). For such connectives, we provide
both of the syntactic categories. E.g. the DC
önce ‘before’ is both an adverb (4) and a post-
position (5).

(4) Ali matematiği iyice anladı. Ama
daha önce bir problemi bile



78

Connective-Lex Syntactic Category of Turkish DCs
cco (Coordinating conjunction) CCONJ
csu (Subordinating conjunction) Converb, ADP
adv (Adverb of adverbial) ADV
other Secondary connective, Other

Table 5: Mapping of TCL syntactic categories onto Connective-Lex categories

yardımsız çözemezdi.
Ali has now grasped math fully. But
before he could not solve even one
math problem without help.’

(5) Bu filmi görmeden önce romanını
okumalısın.
‘Before seeing this movie, you
should read the novel.’

The syntactic categories we assign to the
DCs are; CCONJ, Converb (Simplex Sub-
ordinator), ADP (Postposition, Complex
Subordinator), ADV, Secondary Connective
(”phrasal expressions”) and Other categories,
such as noun-based connectives. These syn-
tactic categories are mapped onto the cate-
gories which the Connective-Lex website of-
fers (cf. Table 5).

• DiMLex Formatter: After creating the list of
DC lexicon entries with all the properties de-
scribed so far, the entries are mapped onto the
DiMLex XML format. Firstly, an XML doc-
ument is created and for each entry of the lex-
icon, an XML node is created. The XML el-
ements and attributes are filled with the prop-
erties of lexicon entries following the Dim-
Lex format.

• DCs in the DiMLex format: At the end of
these steps, we have a list of 180 DCs with
their respective syntactic categories and other
properties.

In Figures 4, 5 and 6, we provide how DCs are rep-
resented in the DiMLex format. Figure 4 presents
the entry of a suffixal connective, Figure 5 shows
the entry for a single connective belonging to the
postposition category and Figure 6 illustrates the
entry for a phrasal discontinuous connective.

We computed the sense distribution of Turkish
explicit DCs by using our corpora and compared
the results with the sense distribution of explicits

in the PDTB 2.0 (Prasad et al., 2014). Table 6 dis-
plays the distribution of top-level classes compar-
atively and shows that the PDTB 2.0 displays an
order of Expansion (33%), Comparison (28.8%),
Contingency (19.2%) and Temporal (19%). This
distribution is preserved in Turkish to a great ex-
tent in the order of Expansion (36%), Contin-
gency (24.4%), Comparison (22.3%), and Tempo-
ral (17.3%).

Sense Class Turkish corpora PDTB
TEMPORAL 360 3696
CONTINGENCY 507 3741
COMPARISON 463 5589
EXPANSION 748 6423
TOTAL 2078 19449

Table 6: Distribution of top-level sense classes among ex-
plicits in the PDTB 2.0 and discourse-annotated corpora of
Turkish

Table 7 provides the most frequent 15 discourse
connectives and their second-level senses com-
piled from all data sources.

6 Conclusion

In sum, the major contributions of this paper have
been:

• to characterize various properties of Turkish
discourse connectives including their syntac-
tic categories and the senses they convey via
discourse-annotated corpora,

• to develop a DimLex-style lexicon of dis-
course connectives to host Turkish discourse
connectives together with their various prop-
erties and sample relations retrieved from an-
notated corpora.

TCL is populated by DCs gleaned from texts be-
longing to different genres. Given that DCs are
sensitive to genre (Webber, 2009), in future work,
we will compute the distribution of senses in dif-
ferent genres and work on incorporating this in-
formation into DiMLex. This aim goes in parallel
with our plan of extending the DC search tool with
new facilities.



79

DC Gloss Senses Total
ve and Conjunction (395), Cause (39), Cause+Belief (2), Asynchronous (24), Syn-

chronous (8), Level-of-detail (3), Conjunction|Level-of-detail (3), Conjunc-
tion|Contrast (1), Conjunction|Synchronous (1), Conjunction|Cause (3), Con-
junction|Instantiation (1)

480

ama but/yet Contrast (92), Concession (135), Exception (8), Concession+SpeechAct
(8), Correction (6), Cause+SpeechAct (2), Conjunction (3), Conces-
sion|Synchronous (1), Concession|Conjunction (1)

256

için to/since Purpose (167), Cause (39), Cause+Belief (3), Degree (2), Level-of-detail (1) 212
sonra then Asynchronous (142) 142
çünkü because Cause+Belief (17), Cause (76) 85
ancak however Concession (36), Exception (4), Contrast (27), Conjunction (1), Exception (1) 69
ayrıca in addition Conjunction (41) 41
-ken while Synchronous (33), Conjunction (2), Concession+SpeechAct (1), Contrast (1) 37
gibi as Conjunction (6), Manner (30), Similarity (1) 37
-(y)HncA when Synchronous (19), Cause (6), Asynchronous (10), Level-of-detail (1) 36
-(y)Hp and Conjunction (33), Manner (2), Synchronous|Conjunction (1) 36
yani that is Equivalence (17), Level-of-detail (4), Cause+Belief (10), Substitution (3),

Cause+SpeechAct (1)
35

-sA if Condition (23), Concession (2), Negative-condition (4), Condition|Purpose (1),
Condition+SpeechAct (3), Substitution (1)

34

-dA when Synchronous (29), Condition (1) 30
önce before Asynchronous (30) 30

Table 7: 15 most frequent discourse connectives and their second-level sense distribution in discourse-annotated corpora

Figure 4: A suffixal connective -(y)Hp ‘and’, the senses it conveys and representative examples



80

Figure 5: A single connective gibi ‘as’, the senses it conveys and representative examples

Figure 6: A phrasal connective ya ... ya da ‘either ... or’, its sense and a representative example

References

Amal Al-Saif and Katja Markert. 2010. The Leeds
Arabic Discourse Treebank: Annotating Discourse
Connectives for Arabic. In LREC, pages 2046–
2053.

Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to abstract objects in
English.

Nicholas Asher. 2012. Reference to abstract objects in
discourse, volume 50. Springer Science & Business
Media.

Laurence Danlos. 2009. D-STAG: a formalism for
discourse analysis based on SDRT and using syn-
chronous TAG. In International Conference on For-
mal Grammar, pages 64–84. Springer.

Laurence Danlos, Katerina Rysova, Magdalena
Rysova, and Manfred Stede. 2018. Primary and
secondary discourse connectives: Definitions and
lexicons. Dialogue and Discourse, 9:50–78.

Debopam Das, Tatjana Scheffler, Peter Bourgonje, and
Manfred Stede. 2018. Constructing a lexicon of En-
glish discourse connectives. In Proceedings of the
19th Annual SIGdial Meeting on Discourse and Di-
alogue, pages 360–365.

Işın Demirşahin and Deniz Zeyrek. 2017. Pair anno-
tation as a novel annotation procedure: The case of
Turkish Discourse Bank. In Handbook of Linguistic
Annotation, pages 1219–1240. Springer.

Anna Feltracco, Elisabetta Jezek, Bernardo Magnini,
and Manfred Stede. 2016. Lico: A lexicon of Italian
connectives. CLiC it, page 141.

Sudheer Kolachina, Rashmi Prasad, Dipti Misra
Sharma, and Aravind K Joshi. 2012. Evaluation
of Discourse Relation Annotation in the Hindi Dis-
course Relation Bank. In LREC, pages 823–828.

Alan Lee, Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber, and Ar-
avind K Joshi. 2016. Annotating discourse rela-
tions with the PDTB annotator. In Proceedings of
COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference



81

on Computational Linguistics: System Demonstra-
tions, pages 121–125.

William C Mann and Sandra A Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text-Interdisciplinary
Journal for the Study of Discourse, 8(3):243–281.

Amália Mendes, Iria del Rio, Manfred Stede, and Felix
Dombek. 2018. A lexicon of discourse markers for
Portuguese–ldm-pt. In 11th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, pages
4379–4384.

Jiřı́ Mı́rovskỳ, Pavlı́na Synková, Magdaléna Rysová,
and Lucie Poláková. 2017. CzeDLex–a lexicon of
Czech discourse connectives. The Prague Bulletin
of Mathematical Linguistics, 109(1):61–91.

Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber, and Aravind Joshi.
2014. Reflections on the Penn Discourse Treebank,
comparable corpora, and complementary annota-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 40(4):921–950.

Charlotte Roze, Laurence Danlos, and Philippe Muller.
2012. Lexconn: a French lexicon of discourse
connectives. Discours. Revue de linguistique, psy-
cholinguistique et informatique. A journal of linguis-
tics, psycholinguistics and computational linguis-
tics, (10).

Tatjana Scheffler and Manfred Stede. 2016. Adding
Semantic Relations to a Large-Coverage Connective
Lexicon of German. In LREC.

Manfred Stede and Carla Umbach. 1998. Dimlex: A
lexicon of discourse markers for text generation and
understanding. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and 17th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics-Volume 2, pages 1238–1242.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bonnie Webber. 2009. Genre distinctions for discourse
in the Penn TreeBank. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL
and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2-
Volume 2, pages 674–682. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Deniz Zeyrek, Isın Demirsahin, A Sevdik-Çallı, and
Ruket Çakıcı. 2013. Turkish Discourse Bank: Port-
ing a discourse annotation style to a morphologically
rich language. D&D, 4(2):174–184.

Deniz Zeyrek and Murathan Kurfalı. 2017. Tdb 1.1:
Extensions on Turkish discourse bank. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th Linguistic Annotation Workshop,
pages 76–81.

Deniz Zeyrek and Murathan Kurfalı. 2018. An assess-
ment of explicit inter-and intra-sentential discourse
connectives in Turkish Discourse Bank. In Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2018).

Deniz Zeyrek, Amália Mendes, Yulia Grishina, Mu-
rathan Kurfalı, Samuel Gibbon, and Maciej Ogrod-
niczuk. 2019. TED Multilingual Discourse Bank
(TED-MDB): A parallel corpus annotated in the
PDTB style. Language Resources and Evaluation,
pages 1–27.

Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A discourse
resource for Turkish: Annotating discourse connec-
tives in the METU corpus. In Proceedings of the 6th
workshop on Asian language resources.

Yuping Zhou and Nianwen Xue. 2015. The Chinese
Discourse Treebank: a Chinese corpus annotated
with discourse relations. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 49(2):397–431.

Sandrine Zufferey and Liesbeth Degand. 2017. Anno-
tating the meaning of discourse connectives in mul-
tilingual corpora. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic
Theory, 13(2):399–422.


