



















































Plain English Summarization of Contracts


Proceedings of the Natural Legal Language Processing Workshop 2019, pages 1–11
Minneapolis, Minesotta, June 7, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1

Plain English Summarization of Contracts

Laura Manor
Department of Linguistics

The University of Texas at Austin
manor@utexas.edu

Junyi Jessy Li
Department of Linguistics

The University of Texas at Austin
jessy@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract

Unilateral contracts, such as terms of service,
play a substantial role in modern digital life.
However, few users read these documents be-
fore accepting the terms within, as they are too
long and the language too complicated. We
propose the task of summarizing such legal
documents in plain English, which would en-
able users to have a better understanding of the
terms they are accepting.

We propose an initial dataset of legal text snip-
pets paired with summaries written in plain
English. We verify the quality of these sum-
maries manually and show that they involve
heavy abstraction, compression, and simpli-
fication. Initial experiments show that unsu-
pervised extractive summarization methods do
not perform well on this task due to the level of
abstraction and style differences. We conclude
with a call for resource and technique devel-
opment for simplification and style transfer for
legal language.

1 Introduction

Although internet users accept unilateral contracts
such as terms of service on a regular basis, it
is well known that these users rarely read them.
Nonetheless, these are binding contractual agree-
ments. A recent study suggests that up to 98% of
users do not fully read the terms of service before
accepting them (Obar and Oeldorf-Hirsch, 2018).
Additionally, they find that two of the top three
factors users reported for not reading these docu-
ments were that they are perceived as too long (‘in-
formation overload’) and too complicated (‘diffi-
cult to understand’). This can be seen in Table 1,
where a section of the terms of service for a pop-
ular phone app includes a 78-word paragraph that
can be distilled down to a 19-word summary.

The European Union’s General Data Protection

Original Text: By using our Services, you are agreeing
to these Terms, our Trainer Guidelines, and our Privacy
Policy. If you are the parent or legal guardian of a child
under the age of 13 (the Parent), you are agreeing to these
Terms on behalf of yourself and your child(ren) who are
authorized to use the Services pursuant to these Terms and
in our Privacy Policy. If you dont agree to these Terms, our
Trainer Guidelines, and our Privacy Policy, do not use the
Services.

Human Summary: By playing this game, you agree to
these terms. If you’re under 13 and playing, your par-
ent/guardian agrees on your behalf.

Table 1: Top: an excerpt from Niantic’s Pokemon GO
Terms of Service. Bottom: a summary written by a
community member of TLDRLegal.

Regulation (2018)1, the United States’ Plain Writ-
ing Act (2010)2, and New York State’s Plain En-
glish law (1978) show that many levels of govern-
ment have recognized the need to make legal infor-
mation more accessible to non-legal communities.
Additionally, due to recent social movements de-
manding accessible and transparent policies on the
use of personal data on the internet (Sykuta et al.,
2007), multiple online communities have formed
that are dedicated to manually annotating various
unilateral contracts.

We propose the task of the automatic summa-
rization of legal documents in plain English for a
non-legal audience. We hope that such a techno-
logical advancement would enable a greater num-
ber of people to enter into everyday contracts with
a better understanding of what they are agreeing
to. Automatic summarization is often used to re-
duce information overload, especially in the news
domain (Nenkova et al., 2011). Summarization
has been largely missing in the legal genre, with
notable exceptions of judicial judgments (Farzin-
dar and Lapalme, 2004; Hachey and Grover, 2006)

1https://eugdpr.org/
2https://plainlanguage.gov/

https://eugdpr.org/
https://plainlanguage.gov/


2

and case reports (Galgani et al., 2012), as well
as information extraction on patents (Tseng et al.,
2007; Tang et al., 2012). While some companies
have conducted proprietary research in the sum-
marization of contracts, this information sits be-
hind a large pay-wall and is geared toward law
professionals rather than the general public.

In an attempt to motivate advancement in this
area, we have collected 446 sets of contract
sections and corresponding reference summaries
which can be used as a test set for such a task.3 We
have compiled these sets from two websites ded-
icated to explaining complicated legal documents
in plain English.

Rather than attempt to summarize an entire doc-
ument, these sources summarize each document at
the section level. In this way, the reader can refer-
ence the more detailed text if need be. The sum-
maries in this dataset are reviewed for quality by
the first author, who has 3 years of professional
contract drafting experience.

The dataset we propose contains 446 sets of par-
allel text. We show the level of abstraction through
the number of novel words in the reference sum-
maries, which is significantly higher than the ab-
stractive single-document summaries created for
the shared tasks of the Document Understanding
Conference (DUC) in 2002 (Over et al., 2007), a
standard dataset used for single document news
summarization. Additionally, we utilize several
common readability metrics to show that there is
an average of a 6 year reading level difference be-
tween the original documents and the reference
summaries in our legal dataset.

In initial experimentation using this dataset, we
employ popular unsupervised extractive summa-
rization models such as TextRank (Mihalcea and
Tarau, 2004) and Greedy KL (Haghighi and Van-
derwende, 2009), as well as lead baselines. We
show that such methods do not perform well on
this dataset when compared to the same methods
on DUC 2002. These results highlight the fact that
this is a very challenging task. As there is not cur-
rently a dataset in this domain large enough for su-
pervised methods, we suggest the use of methods
developed for simplification and/or style transfer.

In this paper, we begin by discussing how this
task relates to the current state of text summariza-
tion and similar tasks in Section 2. We then intro-

3The dataset is available at https://github.com/
lauramanor/legal_summarization

duce the novel dataset and provide details on the
level of abstraction, compression, and readability
in Section 3. Next, we provide results and anal-
ysis on the performance of extractive summariza-
tion baselines on our data in Section 5. Finally, we
discuss the potential for unsupervised systems in
this genre in Section 6.

2 Related work

Given a document, the goal of single document
summarization is to produce a shortened summary
of the document that captures its main semantic
content (Nenkova et al., 2011). Existing research
extends over several genres, including news (Over
et al., 2007; See et al., 2017; Grusky et al., 2018),
scientific writing (TAC, 2014; Jaidka et al., 2016;
Yasunaga et al., 2019), legal case reports (Gal-
gani et al., 2012), etc. A critical factor in success-
ful summarization research is the availability of
a dataset with parallel document/human-summary
pairs for system evaluation. However, no such
publicly available resource for summarization of
contracts exists to date. We present the first dataset
in this genre. Note that unlike other genres where
human summaries paired with original documents
can be found at scale, e.g., the CNN/DailyMail
dataset (See et al., 2017), resources of this kind are
yet to be curated/created for contracts. As tradi-
tional supervised summarization systems require
these types of large datasets, the resources re-
leased here are intended for evaluation, rather than
training. Additionally, as a first step, we restrict
our initial experiments to unsupervised baselines
which do not require training on large datasets.

The dataset we present summarizes contracts in
plain English. While there is no precise defini-
tion of plain English, the general philosophy is to
make a text readily accessible for as many English
speakers as possible. (Mellinkoff, 2004; Tiersma,
2000). Guidelines for plain English often suggest
a preference for words with Saxon etymologies
rather than a Latin/Romance etymologies, the use
of short words, sentences, and paragraphs, etc.4

(Tiersma, 2000; Kimble, 2006). In this respect, the
proposed task involves some level of text simplifi-
cation, as we will discuss in Section 4.2. However,
existing resources for text simplification target lit-
eracy/reading levels (Xu et al., 2015) or learn-
ers of English as a second language (Zhu et al.,
2010). Additionally, these models are trained us-

4https://plainlanguage.gov/guidelines/

 https://github.com/lauramanor/legal_summarization
 https://github.com/lauramanor/legal_summarization
https://plainlanguage.gov/guidelines/


3

ing Wikipedia or news articles, which are quite
different from legal documents. These systems are
trained without access to sentence-aligned paral-
lel corpora; they only require semantically similar
texts (Shen et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2018). To the best of our knowledge, however,
there is no existing dataset to facilitate the transfer
of legal language to plain English.

3 Data

This section introduces a dataset compiled from
two websites dedicated to explaining unilateral
contracts in plain English: TL;DRLegal5 and
TOS;DR6. These websites clarify language within
legal documents by providing summaries for spe-
cific sections of the original documents. The data
was collected using Scrapy7 and a JSON interface
provided by each website’s API. Summaries are
submitted and maintained by members of the web-
site community; neither website requires commu-
nity members to be law professionals.

3.1 TL;DRLegal
TL;DRLegal focuses mostly on software licenses,
however, we only scraped documents related to
specific companies rather than generic licenses
(i.e. Creative Commons, etc). The scraped
data consists of 84 sets sourced from 9 docu-
ments: Pokemon GO Terms of Service, TLDRLe-
gal Terms of Service, Minecraft End User Licence
Agreement, YouTube Terms of Service, Android
SDK License Agreement (June 2014), Google
Play Game Services (May 15th, 2013), Facebook
Terms of Service (Statement of Rights and Re-
sponsibilities), Dropbox Terms of Service, and
Apple Website Terms of Service.

Each set consists of a portion from the original
agreement text and a summary written in plain En-
glish. Examples of the original text and the sum-
mary are shown in Table 2.

3.2 TOS;DR
TOS;DR tends to focus on topics related to user
data and privacy. We scraped 421 sets of par-
allel text sourced from 166 documents by 122
companies. Each set consists of a portion of an
agreement text (e.g., Terms of Use, Privacy Policy,
Terms of Service) and 1-3 human-written sum-
maries.

5https://tldrlegal.com/
6https://tosdr.org/, CC BY-SA 3.0
7https://scrapy.org/

Figure 1: Unique n-grams in the reference summary,
contrasting our legal dataset with DUC 2002 single
document summarization data.

While the multiple references can be useful for
system development and evaluation, the qualities
of these summaries varied greatly. Therefore, each
text was examined by the first author, who has
three years of professional experience in contract
drafting for a software company. A total of 361
sets had at least one quality summary in the set.
For each, the annotator selected the most informa-
tive summary to be used in this paper.

Of the 361 accepted summaries, more than two-
thirds of them (152) are ‘templatic’ summaries. A
summary deemed templatic if it could be found
in more than one summary set, either word-for-
word or with just the service name changed. How-
ever, of the 152 templatic summaries which were
selected as the best of their set, there were 111
unique summaries. This indicates that the tem-
platic summaries which were selected for the final
dataset are relatively unique.

A total of 369 summaries were outright rejected
for a variety of reasons, including summaries that:
were a repetition of another summary for the same
source snippet (291), were an exact quote of the
original text (63), included opinionated language
that could not be inferred from the original text
(24), or only described the topic of the quote but
not the content (20). We also rejected any sum-
maries that are longer than the original texts they
summarize. Annotated examples from TOS;DR
can be found in Table 3.

4 Analysis

4.1 Levels of abstraction and compression

To understand the level of abstraction of the pro-
posed dataset, we first calculate the number of n-

https://tldrlegal.com/
https://tosdr.org/
https://scrapy.org/


4

Source Facebook Terms of Service (Statement of Rights and Responsibilities) - November 15, 2013

Original Text Our goal is to deliver advertising and other commercial or sponsored content that is valuable to our
users and advertisers. In order to help us do that, you agree to the following: You give us permission
to use your name, profile picture, content, and information in connection with commercial, sponsored,
or related content (such as a brand you like) served or enhanced by us. This means, for example, that
you permit a business or other entity to pay us to display your name and/or profile picture with your
content or information, without any compensation to you. If you have selected a specific audience
for your content or information, we will respect your choice when we use it. We do not give your
content or information to advertisers without your consent. You understand that we may not always
identify paid services and communications as such.

Summary Facebook can use any of your stuff for any reason they want without paying you, for advertising in
particular.

Source Pokemon GO Terms of Service - July 1, 2016

Original Text We may cancel, suspend, or terminate your Account and your access to your Trading Items, Virtual
Money, Virtual Goods, the Content, or the Services, in our sole discretion and without prior notice,
including if (a) your Account is inactive (i.e., not used or logged into) for one year; (b) you fail to
comply with these Terms; (c ) we suspect fraud or misuse by you of Trading Items, Virtual Money,
Virtual Goods, or other Content; (d) we suspect any other unlawful activity associated with your
Account; or (e) we are acting to protect the Services, our systems, the App, any of our users, or
the reputation of Niantic, TPC, or TPCI. We have no obligation or responsibility to, and will not
reimburse or refund, you for any Trading Items, Virtual Money, or Virtual Goods lost due to such
cancellation, suspension, or termination. You acknowledge that Niantic is not required to provide a
refund for any reason, and that you will not receive money or other compensation for unused Virtual
Money and Virtual Goods when your Account is closed, whether such closure was voluntary or
involuntary. We have the right to offer, modify, eliminate, and/or terminate Trading Items, Virtual
Money, Virtual Goods, the Content, and/or the Services, or any portion thereof, at any time, without
notice or liability to you. If we discontinue the use of Virtual Money or Virtual Goods, we will
provide at least 60 days advance notice to you by posting a notice on the Site or App or through other
communications.

Summary If you haven’t played for a year, you mess up, or we mess up, we can delete all of your virtual goods.
We don’t have to give them back. We might even discontinue some virtual goods entirely, but we’ll
give you 60 days advance notice if that happens.

Source Apple Website Terms of Service - Nov. 20, 2009

Original Text Any feedback you provide at this site shall be deemed to be non-confidential. Apple shall be free to
use such information on an unrestricted basis.

Summary Apple may use your feedback without restrictions (e.g. share it publicly.)

Table 2: Examples of summary sets from TLDRLegal.

Original Text When you upload, submit, store, send or receive content to or through our Services, you give Google
(and those we work with) a worldwide license to use, host, store, reproduce, modify, create derivative
works (such as those resulting from translations, adaptations or other changes we make so that your
content works better with our Services), communicate, publish, publicly perform, publicly display
and distribute such content.

Summary1 (best) The copyright license you grant is for the limited purpose of operating, promoting, and improving
existing and new Google Services. However, please note that the license does not end if you stop
using the Google services.

Summary2 The copyright license that users grant this service is limited to the parties that make up the service’s
broader platform.

Summary3 Limited copyright license to operate and improve all Google Services

Original Text We may share information with vendors, consultants, and other service providers (but not with ad-
vertisers and ad partners) who need access to such information to carry out work for us. The partners
use of personal data will be subject to appropriate confidentiality and security measures.

Summary1 (best) Reddit shares data with third parties

Summary2 Third parties may be involved in operating the service

Summary3 Third parties may be involved in operating the service
(rejected)

Table 3: Examples from TOS;DR. Contract sections from TOS;DR included up to three summaries. In each case,
the summaries were inspected for quality. Only the best summary was included in the analysis in this paper.



5

Figure 2: Ratio of words in the reference summary to
words in the original text. The ratio was calculated by
dividing the number of words in the reference summary
by the number of words in the original text.

grams that appear only in the reference summaries
and not in the original texts they summarize (See
et al., 2017; Chen and Bansal, 2018). As shown
in Figure 1, 41.4% of words in the reference sum-
maries did not appear in the original text. Addi-
tionally, 78.5%, 88.4%, and 92.3% of 2-, 3-, and
4-grams in the reference summaries did not appear
in the original text. When compared to a standard
abstractive news dataset also shown in the graph
(DUC 2002), the legal dataset is significantly more
abstractive.

Furthermore, as shown in Figure 2, the dataset
is very compressive, with a mean compression rate
of 0.31 (std 0.23). The original texts have a mean
of 3.6 (std 3.8) sentences per document and a mean
of 105.6 (std 147.8) words per document. The ref-
erence summaries have a mean of 1.2 (std 0.6) sen-
tences per document, and a mean of 17.2 (std 11.8)
words per document.

4.2 Readability
To verify that the summaries more accessible to a
wider audience, we also compare the readability
of the reference summaries and the original texts.

Full texts We make a comparison between the
original contract sections and respective sum-
maries using four common readability metrics.
All readability metrics were implemented using
Wim Muskee’s readability calculator library for
Python8. These measurements included:

• Flesch-Kincaid formula (F-K): the
weighted sum of the number of words

8https://github.com/wimmuskee/
readability-score

F-K C-L SMOG ARI Avg

Ref 12.66 15.11 14.14 12.98 13.29
Orig 20.22 16.53 19.58 22.24 19.29

Table 4: Average readability scores for the reference
summaries (Ref) and the original texts (Orig). Descrip-
tions of each measurement can be found in Section 4.2.

in a sentence and the number of syllables per
word (Kincaid et al., 1975),

• Coleman-Liau index (CL): the weighted
sum of the number of letters per 100 words
and the average number of sentences per 100
words (Coleman and Liau, 1975),

• SMOG: the weighted square root of the
number of polysyllable words per sentence
(Mc Laughlin, 1969), and

• Automated readability index (ARI): the
weighted sum of the number of characters
per word and number of words per sentence
(Senter and Smith, 1967).

Though these metrics were originally formulated
based on US grade levels, we have adjusted the
numbers to provide the equivalent age correlated
with the respective US grade level.

We ran each measurement on the reference
summaries and original texts. As shown in Table
4, the reference summaries scored lower than the
original texts for each test by an average of 6 years.

Words We also seek to single out lexical diffi-
culty, as legal text often contains vocabulary that
is difficult for non-professionals. To do this, we
obtain the top 50 words Ws most associated with
summaries and top 50 words Wd most associated
with the original snippets (described below) and
consider the differences of ARI and F-K measures.
We chose these two measures because they are a
weighted sum of a word and sentential properties;
as sentential information is kept the same (50 1-
word “sentences”), the differences will reflect the
change in readability of the words most associated
with plain English summaries/original texts.

To collect Ws and Wd, we calculate the log odds
ratio for each word, a measure used in prior work
comparing summary text and original documents
(Nye and Nenkova, 2015). The log odds ratio
compares the probability of a word w occurring
in the set of all summaries S vs. original texts D:

https://github.com/wimmuskee/readability-score
https://github.com/wimmuskee/readability-score


6

Original Text: arise, unless, receive, whether, exam-
ple, signal, b, technology, identifier, expressly, trans-
mit, visit, perform, search, partner, understand, conduct,
server, child, support, regulation, base, similar, purchase,
automatically, mobile, agent, derivative, either, commer-
cial, reasonable, cause, functionality, advertiser, act, ii,
thereof, arbitrator, attorney, modification, locate, c, in-
dividual, form, following, accordance, hereby, cookie,
apps, advertisement

Reference Summary: fingerprint, fit, header, targeted,
involve, pixel, advance, quality, track, want, stuff, even,
guarantee, maintain, beacon, ban, month, prohibit, al-
low, defend, notification, ownership, acceptance, delete,
user, prior, reason, hold, notify, govern, keep, class,
change, might, illegal, old, harmless, indemnify, see, as-
sume, deletion, waive, stop, operate, year, enforce, tar-
get, many, constitute, posting

Table 5: The 50 words most associated with the origi-
nal text or reference summary, as measured by the log
odds ratio.

log

(
Odds(w, S)

Odds(w,D)

)
' log

(
P (w|S)
P (w|D)

)
The list of words with the highest log odds ra-
tios for the reference summaries (Ws) and original
texts (Wd) can be found in Table 5.

We calculate the differences (in years) of ARI
and F-K scores between Ws and Wd:

ARI(Wd)−ARI(Ws) = 5.66

FK(Wd)− FK(Ws) = 6.12
Hence, there is a∼6-year reading level distinction
between the two sets of words, an indication that
lexical difficulty is paramount in legal text.

5 Summarization baselines

We present our legal dataset as a test set for con-
tracts summarization. In this section, we report
baseline performances of unsupervised, extrac-
tive methods as most recent supervised abstractive
summarization methods, e.g., Rush et al. (2015),
See et al. (2017), would not have enough training
data in this domain. We chose to look at the fol-
lowing common baselines:

• TextRank Proposed by Mihalcea and Tarau
(2004), TextRank harnesses the PageRank
algorithm to choose the sentences with the
highest similarity scores to the original docu-
ment.9

9For this paper we utilized the TextRank package from
Summa NLP: https://github.com/summanlp/
textrank

• KLSum An algorithm introduced by
(Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009) which
greedily selects the sentences that mini-
mize the Kullback-Lieber (KL) divergence
between the original text and proposed
summary.

• Lead-1 A common baseline in news summa-
rization is to select the first 1-3 sentences of
the original text as the summary (See et al.,
2017). With this dataset, we include the first
sentence as the summary as it is the closest
to the average number of sentences per refer-
ence (1.2).

• Lead-K A variation of Lead-1, this baseline
selects the first k sentences until a word limit
is satisfied.

• Random-K This baseline selects a random
sentence until a word limit is satisfied. For
this baseline, the reported numbers are an av-
erage of 10 runs on the entire dataset.

Settings We employ lowercasing and lemmati-
zation, as well as remove stop words and punctu-
ation during pre-processing10. For TextRank, KL-
Sum, Lead-K, and Random-K, we produce sum-
maries budgeted at the average number of words
among all summaries (Rush et al., 2015). How-
ever, for the sentence which causes the summary
to exceed the budget, we keep or discard the full
sentence depending on which resulting summary
is closer to the budgeted length.

Results To gain a quantitative understanding of
the baseline results, we employed ROUGE (Lin,
2004). ROUGE is a standard metric used for eval-
uating summaries based on the lexical overlap be-
tween a generated summary and gold/reference
summaries. The ROUGE scores for the unsuper-
vised summarization baselines found in this paper
can be found in Table 6.

In the same table, we also tabulate ROUGE
scores of the same baselines run on DUC
2002 (Over et al., 2007), 894 documents with sum-
mary lengths of 100 words, following the same
settings. Note that our performance is a bit differ-
ent from reported numbers in Mihalcea and Tarau
(2004), as we performed different pre-processing
and the summary lengths were not processed in the
same way.

10NLTK was used for lemmatization and identification of
stop words.

https://github.com/summanlp/textrank
https://github.com/summanlp/textrank


7

TLDRLegal TOS;DR Combined DUC 2002

R-1 R-2 R-L R-1 R-2 R-L R-1 R-2 R-L R-1 R-2 R-L

TextRank 25.60 8.05 18.62 23.88 6.96 16.96 24.03 7.16 17.10 40.94 18.89 36.70
KLSum 24.98 7.84 18.08 23.25 6.76 16.67 23.56 6.94 16.93 40.06 16.94 35.85
Lead-1 23.09 8.23 17.10 24.05 7.30 17.22 23.87 7.47 17.19 29.66 13.76 19.46
Lead-K 24.04 8.14 17.46 24.47 7.40 17.66 24.38 7.52 17.63 43.57 21.69 39.49
Random-K 21.94 6.19 15.84 22.39 6.17 16.01 22.32 6.33 16.09 35.75 14.12 31.91

Table 6: Performance for each dataset on the baselines was measured using Rouge-1, Rouge-2, and Rouge-L.

Crucially, ROUGE scores are much higher on
DUC 2002 than on our legal dataset. We speculate
that this is due to the highly abstractive nature of
this data, in addition to the divergent styles of the
summaries and original texts.

In general, Lead-K performed best on both
TOS;DR and DUC 2002. The performance gap
between TextRank and Lead-K is much larger on
DUC 2002 than on our dataset. On the legal
datasets, TextRank outperformed Lead-K on TL-
DRLegal and is very close to the performance
of Lead-K on TOS;DR. Additionally, Random-K
performed only about 2 ROUGE points lower than
Lead-K on our dataset, while it scored almost 8
points lower on the DUC 2002 dataset. We at-
tribute this to the structure of the original text;
news articles (i.e. DUC 2002) follow the inverse
pyramid structure where the first few sentences
give an overview of the story, and the rest of the ar-
ticle content is diverse. In contracts, the sentences
in each section are more similar to each other lex-
ically.

Qualitative Analysis We examined some of the
results of the unsupervised extractive techniques
to get a better understanding of what methods
might improve the results. Select examples can
be found in Table 7.

As shown by example (1), the extractive sys-
tems performed well when the reference sum-
maries were either an extract or a compressed ver-
sion of the original text. However, examples (2-4)
show various ways the extractive systems were not
able to perform well.

In (2), the extractive systems were able to select
an appropriate sentence, but the sentence is much
more complex than the reference summary. Uti-
lizing text simplification techniques may help in
these circumstances.

In (3), we see that the reference summary is
much better able to abstract over a larger portion of
the original text than the selected sentences. (3a)

shows that by having much shorter sentences, the
reference summary is able to cover more of the
original text. (3b) is able to restate 651-word orig-
inal text in 11 words.

Finally, in (4), the sentences from the original
text are extremely long, and thus the automated
summaries, while only having one sentence, are
711 and 136 words respectively. Here, we also see
that the reference summaries have a much differ-
ent style than the original text.

6 Discussion

Our preliminary experiments and analysis show
that summarizing legal contracts in plain English
is challenging, and point to the potential useful-
ness of a simplification or style transfer system
in the summarization pipeline. Yet this is chal-
lenging. First, there may be a substantial domain
gap between legal documents and texts that ex-
isting simplification systems are trained on (e.g.,
Wikipedia, news). Second, popular supervised ap-
proaches such as treating sentence simplification
as monolingual machine translation (Specia, 2010;
Zhu et al., 2010; Woodsend and Lapata, 2011;
Xu et al., 2016; Zhang and Lapata, 2017) would
be difficult to apply due to the lack of sentence-
aligned parallel corpora. Possible directions in-
clude unsupervised lexical simplification utilizing
distributed representations of words (Glavaš and
Štajner, 2015; Paetzold and Specia, 2016), unsu-
pervised sentence simplification using rich seman-
tic structure (Narayan and Gardent, 2016), or un-
supervised style transfer techniques (Shen et al.,
2017; Yang et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018). However,
there is not currently a dataset in this domain large
enough for unsupervised methods, nor corpora un-
aligned but comparable in semantics across legal
and plain English, which we see as a call for fu-
ture research.



8

(1a)

Reference Summary librarything will not sell or give personally identifiable information to any third party.
Textrank, Lead-K no sale of personal information. librarything will not sell or give personally identifiable information to

any third party.
KLSum this would be evil and we are not evil.

(1b)
Reference Summary you are responsible for maintaining the security of your account and for the activities on your account
TextRank, KLSum,
Lead-K

you are responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of your password and account if any and are
fully responsible for any and all activities that occur under your password or account

(2a)
Reference Summary if you offer suggestions to the service they become the owner of the ideas that you give them
TextRank, KLSum,
Lead-K

if you provide a submission whether by email or otherwise you agree that it is non confidential unless
couchsurfing states otherwise in writing and shall become the sole property of couchsurfing

(2b)
Reference Summary when the service wants to change its terms users are notified a month or more in advance.
TextRank in this case you will be notified by e mail of any amendment to this agreement made by valve within

60 sixty days before the entry into force of the said amendment.

(2c)
Reference Summary you cannot delete your account for this service.
TextRank, KLSum,
Lead-K

please note that we have no obligation to delete any of stories favorites or comments listed in your
profile or otherwise remove their association with your profile or username.

(3a)

Original Text by using our services you are agreeing to these terms our trainer guidelines and our privacy policy. if
you are the parent or legal guardian of a child under the age of 13 the parent you are agreeing to these
terms on behalf of yourself and your child ren who are authorized to use the services pursuant to these
terms and in our privacy policy. if you don t agree to these terms our trainer guidelines and our privacy
policy do not use the services.

Reference Summary if you don t agree to these terms our trainer guidelines and our privacy policy do not use the services.
TextRank by playing this game you agree to these terms. if you re under 13 and playing your parent guardian

agrees on your behalf.
KLSum, Lead-K by using our services you are agreeing to these terms our trainer guidelines and our privacy policy.

(3b)

Original Text subject to your compliance with these terms niantic grants you a limited nonexclusive nontransferable
non sublicensable license to download and install a copy of the app on a mobile device and to run
such copy of the app solely for your own personal noncommercial purposes. [...] by using the app you
represent and warrant that i you are not located in a country that is subject to a u s government embargo
or that has been designated by the u s government as a terrorist supporting country and ii you are not
listed on any u s government list of prohibited or restricted parties.

Reference Summary don t copy modify resell distribute or reverse engineer this app.
TextRank in the event of any third party claim that the app or your possession and use of the app infringes that

third party s intellectual property rights niantic will be solely responsible for the investigation defense
settlement and discharge of any such intellectual property infringement claim to the extent required by
these terms.

KLSum if you accessed or downloaded the app from any app store or distribution platform like the apple store
google play or amazon appstore each an app provider then you acknowledge and agree that these terms
are concluded between you and niantic and not with app provider and that as between us and the app
provider niantic is solely responsible for the app.

(4a)

Reference Summary don t be a jerk. don t hack or cheat. we don t have to ban you but we can. we ll also cooperate with
law enforcement.

KLSum by way of example and not as a limitation you agree that when using the services and content you will
not defame abuse harass harm stalk threaten or otherwise violate the legal rights including the rights of
privacy and publicity of others [...] lease the app or your account collect or store any personally iden-
tifiable information from the services from other users of the services without their express permission
violate any applicable law or regulation or enable any other individual to do any of the foregoing.

(4b)

Reference Summary don t blame google.
TextRank, KLSum,
Lead-K

the indemnification provision in section 9 of the api tos is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following you agree to hold harmless and indemnify google and its subsidiaries affiliates officers agents
and employees or partners from and against any third party claim arising from or in any way related
to your misuse of google play game services your violation of these terms or any third party s misuse
of google play game services or actions that would constitute a violation of these terms provided that
you enabled such third party to access the apis or failed to take reasonable steps to prevent such third
party from accessing the apis including any liability or expense arising from all claims losses damages
actual and consequential suits judgments litigation costs and attorneys fees of every kind and nature.

Table 7: Examples of reference summaries and results from various extractive summarization techniques. The text
shown here has been pre-processed. To conserve space, original texts were excluded from most examples.



9

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we propose the task of summarizing
legal documents in plain English and present an
initial evaluation dataset for this task. We gather
our dataset from online sources dedicated to ex-
plaining sections of contracts in plain English and
manually verify the quality of the summaries. We
show that our dataset is highly abstractive and that
the summaries are much simpler to read. This task
is challenging, as popular unsupervised extractive
summarization methods do not perform well on
this dataset and, as discussed in section 6, cur-
rent methods that address the change in register
are mostly supervised as well. We call for the de-
velopment of resources for unsupervised simplifi-
cation and style transfer in this domain.

Acknowledgments

We would like to personally thank Katrin Erk for
her help in the conceptualization of this project.
Additional thanks to May Helena Plumb, Barea
Sinno, and David Beavers for their aid in the re-
vision process. We are grateful for the anonymous
reviewers and for the TLDRLegal and TOS;DR
communities and their pursuit of transparency.

References
Yen-Chun Chen and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Fast abstrac-

tive summarization with reinforce-selected sentence
rewriting. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Vol 1: Long Papers), pages 675–686.

Meri Coleman and Ta Lin Liau. 1975. A computer
readability formula designed for machine scoring.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 60(2):283.

Atefeh Farzindar and Guy Lapalme. 2004. Legal text
summarization by exploration of the thematic struc-
ture and argumentative roles. Text Summarization
Branches Out.

Filippo Galgani, Paul Compton, and Achim Hoffmann.
2012. Combining different summarization tech-
niques for legal text. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Innovative Hybrid Approaches to the Pro-
cessing of Textual Data, pages 115–123.

General Data Protection Regulation. 2018. Regula-
tion on the protection of natural persons with re-
gard to the processing of personal data and on the
free movement of such data, and repealing directive
95/46/ec (data protection directive). L119, 4 May
2016, pages 188.

Goran Glavaš and Sanja Štajner. 2015. Simplifying
lexical simplification: Do we need simplified cor-
pora? In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (Vol 2: Short Papers), pages
63–68.

Max Grusky, Mor Naaman, and Yoav Artzi. 2018.
Newsroom: A dataset of 1.3 million summaries with
diverse extractive strategies. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Pa-
pers), pages 708–719.

Ben Hachey and Claire Grover. 2006. Extractive sum-
marisation of legal texts. Artificial Intelligence and
Law, 14(4):305–345.

Aria Haghighi and Lucy Vanderwende. 2009. Explor-
ing content models for multi-document summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 362–370.

Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Sajal
Rustagi, and Min-Yen Kan. 2016. Overview of the
cl-scisumm 2016 shared task. In Proceedings of the
Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Informa-
tion Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for
Digital Libraries, pages 93–102.

Joseph Kimble. 2006. Lifting the fog of legalese: es-
says on plain language. Carolina Academic Press.

J Peter Kincaid, Robert P Fishburne Jr, Richard L
Rogers, and Brad S Chissom. 1975. Derivation of
new readability formulas (automated readability in-
dex, fog count and flesch reading ease formula) for
navy enlisted personnel. In Technical Report, Insti-
tute for Simulation and Training, University of Cen-
tral Florida.

Juncen Li, Robin Jia, He He, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Delete, retrieve, generate: a simple approach to sen-
timent and style transfer. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers),
pages 1865–1874.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summariza-
tion Branches Out.

G Harry Mc Laughlin. 1969. Smog grading-a new
readability formula. Journal of reading, 12(8):639–
646.

David Mellinkoff. 2004. The language of the law.
Wipf and Stock Publishers.



10

Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. 2004. Textrank: Bring-
ing order into text. In Proceedings of the 2004 con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language
processing.

Shashi Narayan and Claire Gardent. 2016. Unsuper-
vised sentence simplification using deep semantics.
In The 9th International Natural Language Genera-
tion conference, pages 111–120.

Ani Nenkova, Kathleen McKeown, et al. 2011. Auto-
matic summarization. Foundations and Trends R© in
Information Retrieval, 5(2–3):103–233.

Benjamin Nye and Ani Nenkova. 2015. Identification
and characterization of newsworthy verbs in world
news. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 1440–1445.

Jonathan A Obar and Anne Oeldorf-Hirsch. 2018. The
biggest lie on the internet: Ignoring the privacy poli-
cies and terms of service policies of social network-
ing services. Information, Communication & Soci-
ety, pages 1–20.

Paul Over, Hoa Dang, and Donna Harman. 2007. DUC
in context. Information Processing & Management,
43(6):1506–1520.

Gustavo H. Paetzold and Lucia Specia. 2016. Unsuper-
vised lexical simplification for non-native speakers.
In Proceedings of the 13th Association for the Ad-
vancement of Artificial Intelligence Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 3761–3767.

Plain English law. 1978. Title 7: Requirements for
use of plain language in consumer transactions. The
Laws Of New York Consolidated Laws. General
Obligations. Article 5: Creation, Definition And En-
forcement Of Contractual Obligations.

Plain Writing Act. 2010. An act to enhance citizen ac-
cess to government information and services by es-
tablishing that government documents issued to the
public must be written clearly, and for other pur-
poses. House of Representatives 946; Public Law
No. 111-274; 124 Statues at Large 2861.

Alexander M. Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2015. A neural attention model for abstractive sen-
tence summarization. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 379–389.

Abigail See, Peter J Liu, and Christopher D Manning.
2017. Get to the point: Summarization with pointer-
generator networks. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Vol 1: Long Papers), pages 1073–1083.

RJ Senter and Edgar A Smith. 1967. Automated read-
ability index. Technical report, Cincinnati Univ OH.

Tianxiao Shen, Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
Jaakkola. 2017. Style transfer from non-parallel text
by cross-alignment. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, pages 6830–6841.

Lucia Specia. 2010. Translating from complex to sim-
plified sentences. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Processing of
the Portuguese Language, pages 30–39.

Michael E Sykuta, Peter G Klein, and James Cutts.
2007. Cori k-base: Data overview.

TAC. 2014. In https://tac.nist.gov/2014/BiomedSumm/.

Jie Tang, Bo Wang, Yang Yang, Po Hu, Yanting Zhao,
Xinyu Yan, Bo Gao, Minlie Huang, Peng Xu, We-
ichang Li, et al. 2012. Patentminer: topic-driven
patent analysis and mining. In Proceedings of the
18th Internationasl Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, pages 1366–1374.

Peter M Tiersma. 2000. Legal language. University of
Chicago Press.

Yuen-Hsien Tseng, Chi-Jen Lin, and Yu-I Lin. 2007.
Text mining techniques for patent analysis. In-
formation Processing & Management, 43(5):1216–
1247.

Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2011. Learn-
ing to simplify sentences with quasi-synchronous
grammar and integer programming. In Proceedings
of the conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, pages 409–420.

Wei Xu, Chris Callison-Burch, and Courtney Napoles.
2015. Problems in current text simplification re-
search: New data can help. Transactions of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 3:283–297.

Wei Xu, Courtney Napoles, Ellie Pavlick, Quanze
Chen, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2016. Optimizing
statistical machine translation for text simplification.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 4:401–415.

Zichao Yang, Zhiting Hu, Chris Dyer, Eric P Xing, and
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. 2018. Unsupervised text
style transfer using language models as discrimina-
tors. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 7298–7309.

Michihiro Yasunaga, Jungo Kasai, Rui Zhang, Alexan-
der R Fabbri Irene Li Dan, and Friedman
Dragomir R Radev. 2019. Scisummnet: A large an-
notated corpus and content-impact models for sci-
entific paper summarization with citation networks.
In Proceedings of the 13th Association for the Ad-
vancement of Artificial Intelligence Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.

Xingxing Zhang and Mirella Lapata. 2017. Sentence
simplification with deep reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
584–594.



11

Zhemin Zhu, Delphine Bernhard, and Iryna Gurevych.
2010. A monolingual tree-based translation model
for sentence simplification. In Proceedings of the
23rd international conference on computational lin-
guistics, pages 1353–1361.


