











































 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper reports on the development of two 

important tools designed specifically for the project 

entitled “the Saudi Learner Translation Corpus” 

(SauLTC): the conversion tool and the SauLTC 

application. The challenges encountered during the 

different stages of the project, especially the stage of 

the corpus alignment, were highlighted. SauLTC is a 

POS-tagged and error annotated parallel corpus 

proposed to be 3 million tokens, including translation 

projects required for graduation at the College of 

Languages at the Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman 

University in Riyadh. It comprises a multi-version 

corpus featuring linguistic annotation, complemented 

with an interface for monolingual or bilingual 

querying of the data. The corpus can be used to 

identify the students’ strategies in translation and 

analyze their patterns of language use. The paper 

describes the corpus parameters and compilation 

process, followed by an explanation of how the textual 

processing and sentence alignment is being conducted.  

A detailed description of the SauLTC conversion tool 

and the application will be provided. Potential uses of 

the corpus will be suggested for research, training and 

pedagogical purposes.  

1 Introduction 

The merge of Learner Corpus Research 

(LCR) and Corpus-Based Translation Studies 

(CBTS) was inevitable due to their shared 

characteristics of interlingual mediation (Granger 

and Lefer, 2018). Both LCR and CBTS involve 

assessing the impact of transfer; a kind of transfer 

from L1 for LCR and from the ST for CBTS 

(Gilquin et al., 2008). Parallel corpora are also 

used in a variety of NLP and IE systems, 

dictionary construction and automatic alignment 

systems.    

In line with these developments, the present 

paper introduces SauLTC, the first unidirectional, 

multiversion parallel learner corpus in the Arab 

world. It consists of final year students’ 

translation projects required for graduation. The 

structure of the paper is as follows: in the 

following section, we reviewed the relevant 

studies in the area of learner translation corpora. 

Section 3 is devoted to the description of the 

design and the development of the SauLTC, its 

structure, participants, corpus compilation and 

data normalization. The conversion tool 

developed for the project is described, together 

with the SauLTC application. Finally, the corpus 

statistics and general remarks will be provided. 

The tool and the application could be used for 

other languages with slight modification of the 

used POS tagger. Both can be accessed by 

contacting the authors.     

2 Related Work  

Corpora that are specifically designed for use 

in the translation pedagogy have been a 

significant development. One of the first 

endeavors is the use of syllabus driven stratified 

parallel corpora to address specific teaching and 

learning tasks and train for specialized areas in 

translation (Tiayon, 2004). Nevertheless, these 

corpora remained reference corpora that 

illustrated best case practice. The primary purpose 

of corpora of learner translations is to provide new 

possibilities and insights into the translation 

training process. Before the availability of 

translation learner corpora, accessing the process 

of translation and translation training was mainly 

conducted through think aloud recordings, 

questionnaires, key-logging and eye-tracking 

(Göpferich and Jääskeläinen, 2009). While the 

results of these methods are informative, their 

collection tends to be limited due to cost and time 

constraints. Corpora, on the other hand, is 

relatively easier to compile and access, which 

encouraged the development of an increasing 

number of bi- and multilingual parallel learner 

corpora around the world. To the best of our 

The Design of the SauLTC application for the 

English-Arabic Learner Translation Corpus 

 
 

Maha Al-Harthi  

Princess Nourah University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 

Amal Alsaif  

Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
 

 

 

  

https://www.scopus.com/affil/profile.uri?afid=60005880


 

 

knowledge, no English- Arabic leaner translator 

corpus has been developed so far. However, there 

are other learner translator language pairs. 

Historically, we can distinguish two main stages 

in the development of learner translator corpus 

research. The first stage comprises early 

endeavors, which were characterized by being 

smaller in size and publicly unavailable, while the 

second stage witnessed more recent projects that 

are greater in size with their own online interfaces 

available to the research community at large.    

One of the earliest learner translation corpora 

was compiled in Germany by Robert Spence 

(1998). Another Learner Translator Corpora are 

PELCRA (Uzar, 2002) and the student 

Translation Archive (STA) (Bowker and 

Bennison, 2003). These early attempts to compile 

collections of electronically stored learner 

translations primarily aimed at identifying 

common problems in learner translations. The 

Russian Translation Learner Corpus or RuTLC 

(Sosnina, 2006) is another type that consists of 

English STs and their translations into Russian as 

the native language. Like the PELCRA corpus, it 

is also error-tagged, allowing automatic analysis 

of learner errors. It is used to identify the 

frequency and distribution of error types in order 

to detect the most frequent lexical, stylistic and 

grammatical errors in student translations in order 

to modify and improve teaching strategies and 

materials. Finally, Multiple Italian Student 

Translation Corpus (MISTiC) was developed by 

Castagnoli (2009) for a corpus-based study on 

explicitation. Multi-parallel and longitudinal 

analyses are possible, as there are several 

translations for each ST and each student 

contributed more than one translation. Although 

collecting and analyzing the output of trainee 

translators can be useful for translation teaching, 

and research started in the above pioneering 

projects at the end of the 1990s, these corpora 

remained exclusive and inaccessible to the wider 

community of researchers. The corpora also 

varied in the number of languages they include, 

the directionality of the translation, and the 

technologies used.  

The second stage was marked by the availability 

of online learner translator corpora projects such 

as the ENTRAD project in Spain, MeLLANGE 

LTC in the UK, RusLTC in Russia, and CorTrad 

in Brazil. ENTRAD (see Flore´n Serrano and 

Lore´s Sanz, 2008) is a text-level aligned corpus 

that can be queried by the metadata such as the 

translator’s age, gender, and mother tongue.  

Perhaps the most remarkable achievement in 

translation learner corpus research was the 

compilation of the MeLLANGE Learner 

Translator Corpus (LTC), which was completed 

in 2007 and provides advanced searchable and 

user-friendly query interfaces that allow the user 

to perform an extensive search through rich 

metadata. The query tool also includes error-

tagging system based on prior linguistic 

annotation.  

The one-to-many concordances are used for 

comparative observations (Castagnoli et al., 

2011). The corpus is compiled of originals of four 

different text types (journalistic, administrative, 

legal and technical) and their translations 

produced by learners as well as professional 

translators (to provide reference translations for 

comparison with student versions: the trainees). 

MeLLANGE represents a valuable source of data 

for universal analyses about translation trainees’ 

performance, due to its availability online and its 

relatively big size. Like the MeLLANGE LTC, 

RusLTC (Kunilovskaya and Kutuzov, 2015) is 

error-tagged and annotated with various metadata 

about translators and translation situations. It is a 

multiple learner translation corpus containing 

English and Russian source texts together with 

their translations produced by Russian translation 

trainees. Similarly, CorTrad (Tagnin et al., 2009) 

is a multiversion English-Brazilian Portuguese 

corpus that allows a comparison not only between 

source texts and translations, but also between the 

different translations of the same source text.   

Recent developments in the field of translation 

learner corpus research include KOPTE (Corpus 

Project of Translation Evaluation) (Wurm, 2016), 

UPF LTC (University of Pompeu Fabra learner 

translator corpus) (Espunya, 2013), and CELTraC 

(Czech-English Learner Translation Corpus) 

(Štěpánková, 2014). However, these corpora are 

not yet made available online.   

Sylviane Granger and her team from the Centre for 

English Corpus Linguistics of Université 

Catholique de Louvain proposed a new corpus 

project initiative entitled Multilingual Student 



 

 

Translation (MUST) in 2016. This corpus can be 

searchable on a web-based interface, 

Hypal4MUST, an adapted version of the Hypal 

tool designed by Obrusnik (2014) for the 

processing of parallel texts.  

The above-mentioned corpora differ mainly in 

terms of the languages involved, the translation 

direction, and the techniques/technology 

employed for corpus creation and querying. Most 

of these corpora, similar to the present corpus, 

focus on translations into the students’ native 

language in order to investigate translation related 

phenomena, whereas the corpora that include 

student output in the foreign language were 

considered as a tool for foreign language teaching 

(Uzar and Waliński, 2001). The principal 

objective of these projects is to identify common 

problems and errors in student translations in order 

to improve teaching materials.  

3 SauLTC  
SauLTC is a promising project that was initiated 

to keep up with the latest developments in 

linguistic research and to make use of the piling 

archive of the PNU students’ translation projects. 

SauLTC is a multi-version corpus organized in 

three parallel sub-corpora. The first corpus  

 
Figure 1: The alignment directions of the SauLTC files  

comprises the English source texts. The second 

and third corpora include two versions of the 

translations of one source text: First, the draft 

translation (Version 1 of TT) is the first attempt of 

the student to translate the source text on her own. 

Second, the final translation (Version 2 of TT) is 

the student’s same translation after making the 

necessary changes based on her instructor’s 

feedback.   

Each student’s contribution includes a learner 

profile, the source text, the draft translation and the 

post-instructor feedback final submission. All this 

information is described in the searchable corpus 

metadata, with all translations and metadata being 

anonymized. The corpus is sentence aligned across 

all three versions (see Fig.1). Thus, one of the 

functionalities available in our corpus allows end 

users to examine what a trainee translator produces 

on her own (draft translation) and the effect of an 

expert translator’s feedback (final translation 

submission).  

  

3.1 Participants  

The creation and compilation of the 

SauLTC involved three types of participants. The 

first and main type of participant are the students 

who are Arabic native language speakers. Their 

explicit participation consent is documented on the 

profile forms in addition to other background 

information they provided. The second type of 

participants are the instructors who provided 

feedback on the students’ drafts and later assessed 

the students’ final submission. The third type of 

participant is the alignment verifiers, qualified 

translators, who were later enlisted to double-

check the automatic sentence alignment. Each 

verifier aligned at least three students’ projects 

which entails the double-checking of nine 

parallelization.   

  

3.2 Corpus Compilation  

Currently, there are 186 student participants, 47 

instructor participants, and 17 alignment assistants 

(see section 3.8).  As mentioned above, each 

student’s contribution consists of three Microsoft 

Word files and a learner profile in a Word 

template. The leaner profile includes detailed 

information about English language exposure, 

together with the student’s consent form. The 

source texts are chapters or booklet extractions 

from extracted fiction, self-help, biography, 

history, health, psychology, religion, culture, 

management or science. The source texts are 6000 

words on average. All three documents are 

collected in one folder under the student’s name in 

addition to the student’s profile information. We 

designed naming convention for this first 



 

 

version of the corpus as following: each folder 

is named ‘SauLTC_V1_Seq-

No4digits_Year_SsmesterNo’, for example, 

SauLTC_V1_0008_2016_S2; the four Word files 

in the folder have the same naming that end with 

one of the following depending on its type 

(_source, _draft, _final _metadata). We also 

separately collected metadata information of 

supervisors and alignment verifiers that were 

recruited to manually double-check the automatic 

sentence alignment in online forms. This 

information include the educational background, 

professional experience, the consent and work 

commitment.  

 

3.3 Data Normalization  

Due to the large number of illustrations, tables, 

diagrams and figures that the source and final 

translated texts included and the various ways that 

students used to deal with, all texts require a prior 

stage of normalization to minimize the challenges  

that the alignment process may face. Some 

students excluded these illustrations from their 

draft target texts and subsequently their final 

target texts. Others translated and recreated them 

in the target texts. Since these illustrations and 

tables as well as the strategies followed by 

students in dealing with them are an integral part 

of the translation process, we decided to include 

them in the searchable database. However, the 

automatic sentence aligner can only handle 

running text. tables had to be removed and saved 

separately in order to be manually aligned.  

Due to the large number of student folders, we 

developed our own tool, SauLTC XML 

Conversion tool, to extract all these illustrations 

(See section 3.4). The tool is effective, but it is not 

able to distinguish automatically in-text 

illustrations and diagrams from irrelevant 

paragraph lines, borders and other decorative 

embellishments. These superfluous additions 

have to be deleted manually from each student’s 

folder post-extraction. The relevant diagrams and 

tables are then added to the database 

automatically to be accessed by the researcher 

when needed.  

 

3.4 SauLTC XML Conversion tool  

One of the main obstacles of the initial automatic 

processing of the student folders is the diversity 

of the translation genres and the formatting. This 

lack of uniformity led us to develop a converter, 

SauLTC XML Conversion tool. The tool is able 

to convert any word text file (English or Arabic) 

into XML standard format with ability of 

extracting all figures, tables and formatting 

shapes separately. Figure 3 shows the main screen 

of the tool where the user should upload the three 

Word files: source, draft translation, and final 

translation with the translation learner metadata.  

Before the XML conversion, the tool recognizes 

and removes headers, footers and decorating 

shapes that student may include in their 

submission. The tool also clean up the text from 

any extra spaces. Once the conversion process is 

complete, the statistical information of the 

number of paragraphs, sentences, words, unique 

tokens, tables and images will be shown for all the 

three files. These statistics could be used to check 

the quality of the translation and how the student 

modifies the final version compared to the draft 

version.   

  

  

-   

Figure 2: The pipeline process of constructing the 

SauLTC 

 Raw files : 4   
Source, Draft, Final  

translation   
Participants ’   profiles   

Auto - alignment  
using Word Fast   

Extracting  
alignments, text  
and metadata 

Extracting pictures and  
tables   

Using the convertor tool  
+   

Converting metadata 
into XML 

SauLTC 

  SauLTC 

  

  
  

POS tagging  

Excel files: S_D, D_F, S_F 

    Application  
& Website   

    

  

  



 

 

The tool also offers browsing and editing 

facilities on the extracted text and save the new 

editing into the XML format.  The user also can 

browse the extraction of metadata and modify 

any field before converting it into XML format. 

Due to the inconsistency on filling the earlier 

metadata form manually by the student, for 

example, the student may remove some fields or 

add unwanted information, which make the 

automatic extraction difficult and need a kind or 

normalization to ensure that the selected fields 

are correctly filled. The resulted XML and JPEJ 

files will be transferred into the next process of 

the corpus manipulation as in Figure 2.   

  

3.5 Corpus Parallelization  

The SauLTC is a sentence aligned bilingual 

corpus. For more efficiency, our alignment 

process runs in two stages: automatic alignment 

(English-Arabic and Arabic-Arabic pairs) and 

manual verification, as in Figure 2. The Auto-

aligner at WordFast Anywhere was utilized for 

the automatic parallelization of the source text, 

draft text, and final submission text. WordFast 

Anywhere is a free web-based set of translation 

memory products.   

The manual verification of the automated 

aligned files is all handled by the verifiers who 

should receive at least three student folders; each 

has the four Word files (source, draft, final 

translations and the metadata) and follow the 

instructions in the SauLTC alignment 

guidelines. We offer a tutorial video to ensure 

that each verifier had everything explained in a 

step-by-step format with online assistance by the 

corpus team. After they complete their double-

checking and report comments for any unusual 

dealings, they fill in an online short form 

indicating an approximation of the number of 

hours it took and the number of mis-alignments 

they found. The parallelized three excel sheets 

(source_draft, source_final, draft_final) are 

uploaded to the SauLTC team. These excel 

sheets are then converted into XML files and 

used to create the online parallel searchable 

database automatically (See section 3.7 for more 

details about the tool).  

 

3.6  Part of Speech (PoS) Tagging  

To maximize the benefit of using the SauLTC 

corpus in research, all sentences in the three 

versions are morphologically tagged using 

powerful POS automatic taggers for both 

languages. For the English source texts, the 

Stanford Automatic Tagger (Toutanova et al., 

2003) was used, due to its availability as a 

powerful open source English tagger. For Arabic, 

MADAMIRA (Pasha et al., 2014) was used to tag 

the Arabic texts.   

In fact, the two tag sets are not identical which led 

to a mismatching problem while comparing the 

word classes in source and target texts in any 

parallel grammatical investigations. For instance, 

the user should use the actual POS tags when 

exploring the corpus in our engine. To overcome 

this issue, we propose a general tag set to map the 

two different tag sets: SauLTC General tags. Then, 

the end user is able to use a specific tag within 

either the English source files or the Arabic target 

files using unique tags, while he is able to use the 

more specific POS tags as well by specifying the 

language in corresponding files.  

The POS tagging is run on sentence level for more 

accurate tags and  this process requires more text 

processing including tokenization and combining 

words with corresponding tags. The tags are saved 

in our database and can be extracted in the XML 

files using our application and the website.   

Figure 3: The SauLTC XML Conversion tool 

main interface  

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

3.7  SauLTC  Application  

After completing the parallelization process 

with the manual verification of each excel 

alignment file, an automatic extracting desktop 

Java application has been developed to deal with 

these files (source_draft, source_final, and 

draft_final). For each alignment file, the 

application extracts the text of sentences, 

tokenizes the words, and extracts POS tags 

(Arabic and English) along with the general POS 

tag. We designed a comprehensive database to 

store all information required and to simplify and 

fasten the searching and corpus extraction 

processes. The user may only upload the excel 

files, the application will continue the remaining 

process automatically.    

In the following section, we list the main 

features of the SauLTC application:   

  

Importing additional translated files: This 

feature is to add more translations into the corpus. 

The application requests all aligned excel files 

(source-draft, source-final, draft-final) that are 

produced by WordFast and verified by the 

verifiers and the folder that has the images and 

table files. The user assigns a translation learner 

name and the verifier name from a predefined list. 

If the names are not listed, the user should add the 

new names in the editing participants tab.   

The text in all files are extracted into the 

database and segmented further into words and 

saved with the automatic POS tag using Stanford 

for English and MADAMIERA for Arabic 

automatically. Any other figures and illustrations 

are also saved in the database.  

 

Learner interface: This feature is to add, delete, 

and edit the learner metadata. Only the user who 

should be the administrator of the corpus can edit 

any information of the learner: name, age, 

demographic information, educational 

background, translation experience, the use of 

reference material and so on.  

Supervisor interface:   This feature is to add, 

delete, and edit supervisor metadata. The user who 

should be the administrator of the corpus can edit 

any information of the supervisor: name, 

educational background, years of experience in 

teaching translation, and years of experience in 

supervising translation projects. 

 

Verifier interface:   This feature is to add, delete, 

and edit alignment verifier metadata. The user who 

should be the administrator of the corpus can edit 

any information of the verifier: name, age, 

translation experience and educational level.  

Exporting the corpus: This feature is used to 

extract the whole corpus or a couple of files that 

belongs to a specific verifier or learner. The 

extraction will be in seven XML files: the text 

tokenized with POS tags and the SauLTC general 

tags of all the source, draft, and final translation, 

the metadata of the participants (learner, 

supervisor, and verifier), source-draft alignment, 

source-final alignment, draft-final alignment 

files. All these files share the same naming 

convention as well as the folder name (i.e.  

SauLTC_V1_0008_2016_S2).  

  

Figure 4: Two samples of the SauLTC desktop application for exploring the corpus and extracting words or 

phrases. 

  

  

 

  



 

 

 

Exploring the corpus:  This is the most powerful 

feature of our application. The user is able to 

search according to single or multiple criteria at 

the same time. First, the user has to select the 

alignment path (source-draft, draft-final, source-

final), and enters a word or a phrase s/he wants to 

search for. He could specify the POS tags either 

language specific or the SauLTC tags, in addition 
to any information from the metadata of the 

learner, the supervisor and the alignment verifier.  

Figure 4 presents screenshots of exploring the 

corpus with all metadata, and how the application 

process enquires of words or phrases. The user 

may use regular expressions in the search box 

along with POS tags. The resulting table could be 

exported in CVS format for more portability.   

  

The Basic SauLTC Statistics  Total    
Number of Alignment Verifiers  17    
Number of Learners  209    
Number of Supervisor/Teachers 47    

The SauLTC corpus - Version 1   Avg per  
translation  

Distinct Translation Instances  115  -  

Total Files (source, draft, final)  345    

English Sentences in source  36,518  318  

Arabic Sentences in draft  32,196  280  

Arabic Sentences in final  32,468  282  

Total Sentences  101,182  880  

Number of English Words  610,370  5,308 

Number of Arabic Words  1081,746  9,406   

Words in draft  536,177  4,662  

Words in final  545,569  4,744  

Total Words  1,692,116  14,714   

Total Images  1,014  9  

The sentence-paralizations      
Source to Draft Translations  30,421  265  

Source to Final Translations  30,575  266  

Draft to Final Translations  29,628  258  

Table 1: The SauLTC Statistics of the first version 

 

3.8  Corpus Statistics  

The first version of the SauLTC corpus has 

30,421 sentence-parallelization in source_draft, 

30,575 sentence-parallelization in source_final, 

and 29,628 sentence-parallelization in draft_final 

alignment of only 115 translations in this version. 

The total number of tokens is 1,692,116, with an 

average of 14,714 tokens per file, with all 

corresponding tags: Stanford tags for English 

words and MADAMIRA tags for Arabic words, 

in addition to the general tags for both. The total 

number of translation students in the whole 

project is 186 who were under the supervision of 

47 instructors. The alignment verification is 

carried out by at least 17 verifiers, participating in 

the project.  

While we have 36,518 English sentences in 

source files, the aligned sentences are only 30,421 

in source_draft alignment, which indicates that 

there is no one-to-one sentence-parallelization 

when the students translate the text.    

For instance, there are 53 sentences on average in 

the source file that were merged or deleted when 

translated into Arabic draft and 52 sentences on 

average for source_final alignment.   

In terms of words, similarly there is around 645 

words in English were omitted when translated 

into Arabic draft, and around omitted 563 words 

when verified by the supervisors in the final 

version. In fact, these findings support the claim 

that Arabic has a richer semantic lexical system 

than English does, where one Arabic word may be 

translated into a phrase or multiple words in 

English to express the same meaning. In addition, 

the morphological structure in Arabic allows 

constructing a complete meaningful sentence in 

one token such as (  سننتبها/we will write it down). 

There is no significant difference between the 

number of sentences and words in draft and final 

versions, both are Arabic. The learner tended to 

make fewer changes in the final version, 

following the supervisor’s comments; the 

sentence average in the final translation was 

decreased by only 22 sentences compared to the 

draft version. The verifiers provide any 

significant remarks and comments during the 

alignment process to assist the researchers to track 

the changes in the translations.  

4 Conclusion  

This paper introduces the first version of the 

SauLTC, together with some of the tools developed 

specifically for this corpus: SauLTC XML 

Conversion tool designed to convert word text files 

into XML standard format, and SauLTC desktop 



 

 

application which is an automatic extraction tool 

developed to deal with the alignment excel sheets 

with automatic POS tagging.  SauLTC represents 

the first learner translator parallel corpus for an 

English Arabic language pair. It is also one of the 

first corpora to provide parallelization of pre-edited 

and post-edited versions of trainee translations. 

This paper describes the challenges encountered at 

some of the compilation stages. The most 

prominent challenge was in the process of text 

alignment, due to the huge differences in the 

punctuation mark systems between the English 

source texts and their Arabic translations in terms 

of their segmentations, which in turn made 

automatic alignment imprecise. The practical 

solution was to hire assistants to manually verify 

and double check the alignment of sentences 

between the three documents of the same text. The 

launching of a website for the corpus and making 

it available online will be the following stage in the 

project. This will provide researchers the 

opportunity of exploring SauLTC with multiple 

selections of criteria such as extracting specific 

words or phrases with optional morphological 

features in translated texts or parallel texts, 

tracking the errors, investigating strategies 

followed by translation learners while translating 

multi-word units and obtaining some statistics of 

any searchable component. All the features 

included in the SauLTC application, in addition to 

some other features will be available in the 

website.  

 

The corpus was designed to enable 

researchers to examine the translation process 

both quantitatively and qualitatively. It is a 

valuable resource for automatic processing of 

bilingual text. Translation instructors and 

translation students and trainees can utilize the 

corpus for a more data-driven approach to 

learning and training. Overall, the potential 

applications of an English-Arabic learner 

translation corpus are numerous and valuable for 

research, training purposes of automatic NLP 

systems such as machine translation, word 

alignment systems and dictionary construction.    

Acknowledgments 

This paper is part of a project that was funded by 

the Deanship of Scientific Research at Princess 

Nourah bint Abdulrahman University. We are 

grateful to all the participants who helped 

throughout the different stages of the project: the 

students, the instructors and the alignment 

verifiers. Special thanks goes also to all the 

research assistants and the team of the project 

programmers. We are very grateful to the 

anonymous reviewers for their very insightful 

comments and suggestions that have greatly 

improved this paper. 

 

References  

Adam Obrusník. 2014. Hypal: A User-Friendly Tool 

for Automatic Parallel Text Alignment and Error 

Tagging. Eleventh International Conference 

Teaching and Language Corpora, Lancaster, pp. 

67-69.  

Andrea Wurm. 2016. Presentation of the KOPTE 

Corpus and Research Project. 

https://www.academia.edu/24012369/Presentation

_of_the_KOPTE_Corpus_and_Research_Project. 

Anna Espunya. 2014. The UPF learner translation 

corpus as a resource for translator training. 

Language Resources and Evaluation 48(1): 33-43. 

Arfath Pasha, Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Mona Diab, 

Ahmed El Kholy, Ramy Eskander, Nizar Habash, 

Manoj Pooleery, Owen Rambow, and Ryan M. 

Roth. 2014. MADAMIRA: A Fast, Comprehensive 

Tool for Morphological Analysis and 

Disambiguation of Arabic. Proceedings of the 9th 

Language Resources and Evaluation Conference 

(LREC'14): 1094-1101  

Charles Tiayon. 2004. “Corpora in translation teaching 

and learning”. Language Matters, 35 (1): 119-132. 

Ekaterina Sosnina. 2006. Development and 

application of Russian translation learner corpus. In 

Proceedings of corpus linguistics—2006, St. 

Petersburg, Russia: 365–373.  

Gaëtanelle Gilquin, Szilvia Papp, and María B. Díez-

Bedmar (eds.). 2008. Linking up Contrastive and 

Learner Corpus Research. Amsterdam/Atlanta: 

Rodopi. 

Kelly Washbourne. 2015. Learning to Fail: 

Unsuccessful Translations as Pedagogical 

Resource. Current Trends in Translation Teaching 

and Learning E, 2: 285–320.   

Kirsten Malmkjær. 2017. The Routledge Handbook of 

Translation Studies and Linguistics. Abingdon & 

New York: Routledge. 

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. 

Manning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-Rich 

Part-of-Speech Tagging with a Cyclic Dependency 

https://www.academia.edu/24012369/Presentation_of_the_KOPTE_Corpus_and_Research_Project
https://www.academia.edu/24012369/Presentation_of_the_KOPTE_Corpus_and_Research_Project


 

 

Network. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL, 252-

259. 

Kristýna Štěpánková. 2014. Learner Translation 

Corpus: CELTraC (Czech-English Learner 

Translation Corpus). Bachelor’s Diploma Thesis.  

Lynne Bowker and Peter Bennison. 2003. Student 

Translation Archive: Design, development and 

application. In F. Zanettin, S. Bernardini & D. 

Stewart (eds.) Corpora in Translator Education. 

London & New York: Routledge, 103-117. 

Malcolm Williams. 1989. The Assessment of 

Professional Translation Quality: Creating 

Credibility out of Chaos.  In  TTR 

(Traduction, terminologie, Rédaction) 2 (2): 13-33. 

María C. F. Serrano. 2006. ENTRAD, an English 

Spanish parallel corpus created for the teaching of 

translation. Paper presented at the 7th Teaching and 

Language Corpora Conference (TALC 2006). 

Maria Kunilovskaya and Andrey Kutuzov. 2015. A 

quantitative study of translational Russian (based 

on а translational learner corpus). In Corpus 

Linguistics  2015.  Proceedings  of the 

 7th International Conference: 33-40. 

Natalie Kübler. 2008. A comparable Learner 

Translator Corpus: Creation and use. LREC 2008 

Workshop on Comparable Corpora: 73-78. 

Rafal Uzar and Jacek T. Waliński. 2001. Analysing 

the fluency of translators. International journal of 

corpus linguistics, 6: 155-166.  

Rafal Uzar. 2002. A corpus methodology for analysing 

translation. In Tagnin, S.E.O. (Ed.), Cadernos de 

Tradução: Corpora e Tradução, 1(9): 235–263. 

Robert Spence. 1998. “A corpus of student L1-L2 

translation”. In Granger S. and Hung J. (eds.). 

Proceedings of the First International Symposium 

on Computer Learner Corpora, Second Language 

Acquisition and Foreign Language Teaching, 110-

112. 

Sara Castagnoli, Dragos Ciobanu, Kerstin Kunz, 

Natalie Kübler, and Alexandra Volanschi. 2011. 

"Designing a learner translator corpus for training 

purposes." Corpora, Language, Teaching, and 

Resources: From Theory to Practice 12: 221-248. 

Sara Castagnoli. 2009. Regularities and variations in 

learner translations: A corpus-based study of 

conjunctive explicitation. PhD Dissertation, 

University of Pisa. 

Stella E. O. Tagnin. 2014. The CoMET Project: 

Corpora for Teaching and Translation. In T. 

Sardinha & T. Ferreira (Eds.), Working with 

Portuguese Corpora, 201-214. Bloomsbury.  

Stella E. O. Tagnin, Elisa Duarte Teixeira, Diana 

Santos. 2009.  CorTrad: a multiversion translation 

corpus for the Portuguese-English pair., Teixeira, 

E., and Santos, D. (2009).  CorTrad: a multiversion 

translation corpus for the Portuguese-English pair., 

Teixeira, E., and Santos, D. (2009).  CorTrad: a 

multiversion translation corpus for the Portuguese-

English pair. 28th. conference on Lexis and 

Grammar, Bergen. 

Susanne Göpferich and Riitta Jääskeläinen. 2009. 

Process research into the development of 

translation competence: Where are we, where do 

we need to go? Across Languages and Cultures, 

10 (2): 169-191. 

Sylviane Granger and Marie-Aude Lefer. 2018. 

MUST: A collaborative corpus collection initiative 

for translation teaching and research. CECL 

Papers: 72-73.  

 

 

 

 

 

 


