




































Global Under-Resourced Media Translation (GoURMET)

Alexandra Birch,1 Barry Haddow,1 Ivan Titov,1, Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone,1 Rachel Bawden,1
Felipe Sánchez-Martı́nez,2 Mikel L. Forcada,2 Miquel Esplà-Gomis,2 Vı́ctor M. Sánchez-Cartagena,2

Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz,2 Wilker Aziz,3 Andrew Secker,4 Peggy van der Kreeft5

1University of Edinburgh (GBR), 2Universitat d’Alacant (ESP)
3Universiteit van Amsterdam (NDL), 4BBC (GBR), 5Deutsche Welle (DEU)

Abstract

We present the EU H2020 GoURMET
project (2019-2021) which aims to tackle
the challenge of low-resource machine
translation for our media partners. This
will help them to both monitor news in a
wider range of languages, and also more
efficiently produce content especially for
languages from Africa and India.

Overview

Machine translation (MT) is an increasingly im-
portant technology for supporting communication
in a globalised world. Over the last few years neu-
ral machine translation methods have led to sig-
nificant improvements in translation quality. How-
ever, they rely on large parallel corpora for training
and are not able to deliver usable translations for
the vast majority of language pairs in the world.
The aim of GoURMET is to significantly improve
the robustness and applicability of neural machine
translation for low-resource language pairs and do-
mains. The project is co-ordinated by the Univer-
sity of Edinburgh, and the other partners are: the
Universitat d’Alacant, the Universiteit van Ams-
terdam, the British Broadcasting Corporation, and
Deutsche Welle. So far we have delivered 8 trans-
lation models to our user partners (BBC and DW)
for evaluation. These models cover the language
pairs of English to and from Turkish, Gujarathi,
Swahili and Bulgarian.

Objectives

1. Advancing low-resource deep learning for
natural language applications;

c© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

2. High-quality machine translation for low-
resource and diverse language pairs and do-
mains;

3. Development of tools for media analysts and
journalists;

4. Sustainable, maintainable platform and ser-
vices;

5. Dissemination and communication of project
results to stakeholders.

Use Cases

1. Global content creation – managing content
creation in several languages efficiently by
providing machine translations for correction
by humans;

2. Media monitoring for low-resource language
pairs – tools to address the challenge of mon-
itoring media in strategically important lan-
guages;

3. International business news analysis – reli-
ably translating and analysing news in the
highly specialised financial domain.

Impact

The outputs of the project will be field-tested
at partners BBC and DW, and the platform will
be further validated through innovation intensives
such as the workshops centred around our user
group and BBC NewsHacks.

Contact

info@gourmet-project.eu
www.gourmet-project.eu

Acknowledgement This project has received
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No. 825299.

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 122


