



















































The Romanian Corpus Annotated with Verbal Multiword Expressions


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multiword Expressions and WordNet (MWE-WN 2019), pages 13–21
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

13

The Romanian Corpus Annotated with Verbal Multiword Expressions

Verginica Barbu Mititelu
RACAI, Bucharest, Romania

vergi@racai.ro

Mihaela Cristescu
UB, Faculty of Letters
Bucharest, Romania

mihaella.ionescu@yahoo.com

Mihaela Onofrei
ICS, RA, Iasi branch

UAIC, FCS
Iaşi, Romania

mihaela.plamada.
onofrei@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper reports on the Romanian journal-
istic corpus annotated with verbal multiword
expressions following the PARSEME guide-
lines. The corpus is sentence split, tokenized,
part-of-speech tagged, lemmatized, syntacti-
cally annotated and verbal multiword expres-
sions are identified and classified. It offers
insights into the frequency of such Romanian
word combinations and allows for their char-
acterization. We offer data about the types
of verbal multiword expressions in the corpus
and some of their characteristics, such as in-
ternal structure, diversity in the corpus, aver-
age length, productivity of the verbs. This is a
language resource that is important per se, as
well as for the task of automatic multiword ex-
pressions identification, which can be further
used in other systems. It was already used as
training and test material in the shared tasks
for the automatic identification of verbal mul-
tiword expressions organized by PARSEME.

1 Introduction

Recent years marked an intense international pre-
occupation with the multiword expressions within
a multilingual community of specialists with mul-
tiple interests: linguistic description (Iñurrieta
et al., 2018), classification (Savary et al., 2018),
specific resources identification (Losnegaard et al.,
2016) or development (Savary et al., 2018), syn-
tactic annotation practice (Rosén et al., 2015) and
recommendations (Rosén et al., 2016), processing
(Constant et al., 2017), crosslingual comparison
(Koeva et al., 2018; Barbu Mititelu and Leseva,
2018), etc. They were made possible thanks to
the PARSEME Cost Action (Savary et al., 2015).
Such activities continue older preoccupations with
such lexical units, given their problematic na-
ture on several aspects (Sag et al., 2002; Baldwin
and Kim, 2010): meaning, inflexion, discontinu-
ity, ambiguity, translatability, etc. (Savary et al.,

2018), which motivate further investigations in
different languages.

Within this effervescent context, the aim of this
paper is to describe the creation of the Romanian
corpus annotated with verbal multiword expres-
sions (VMWEs), its characteristics and availabil-
ity, as well as the VMWEs occurring in it, from
several perspectives. Section 2 presents, on the
one hand, the state of the art of the work done in
the Romanian linguistics with respect to VMWEs,
and, on the other hand, other international initia-
tives of annotating VMWEs in corpora. In section
3 we present the types of VMWEs defined within
the PARSEME guidelines and applicable to Ro-
manian. The characteristics of the annotated cor-
pus are identified in section 4. It is followed by
a brief description of the annotation process (sec-
tion 5). The largest part of the paper is dedicated
to the presentation of the VMWEs annotated in the
corpus (section 6). We start with some frequency
remarks on various VMWEs types within the mul-
tilingual context of the annotation, then focus on
the diversity of the VMWEs in the Romanian cor-
pus, their average length. Their internal structure
is presented in a detailed way in the same section
and then conclusions are drawn (section 7) and fu-
ture work is envisaged.

2 Related Work

In the Romanian linguistics the analysis of multi-
word expressions is an old concern, dating back
to the ’50s (Ioaniţescu, 1956). Even since then
has there been a special interest in the Roma-
nian verbal multiword expressions (Dimitrescu,
1958). However, as remarked by Căpăţână (2007),
throughout time, the authors have used a lot of dif-
ferent terms for referring to such linguistic units,
there have been divergent opinions with respect
to their definition, to their classification and their
structural description. Nowadays the lexicolo-
gists’ interest in this linguistic phenomenon is still



14

not so strong, while the computational aspects
have also been poorly studied. Todiraşcu et al.
(2009) identified verb-noun collocations in a mul-
tilingual context using lexico-grammatical con-
structions specific to them. Todiraşcu and Navlea
(2015) used verb-noun collocations extracted from
a parallel French-Romanian corpus to improve
machine translation. Rizea et al. (2016) studied
multiword expressions from their interest in nega-
tive polarity items. Within PARSEME, a template
describing Romanian VMWEs syntactic structure,
fixedness/flexibility of their parts, and idiomaticity
(lexical, syntactic, semantic, pragmatic and statis-
tical) was created. Within the same Cost Action,
another initiative was the organization of a shared
task for automatic identification and classification
of MWEs in corpora. The focus was only on ver-
bal MWEs and representatives of many languages,
Romanian included, joined the effort of creating
the resource necessary for training and testing the
systems participating in the competition (Savary
et al., 2018).

PARSEME action is not the only initiative of
annotating VMWEs in corpora: Kato et al. (2018)
describe the annotation of VMWEs in an English
journalistic corpus: it is rather the identification of
a list of dictionary-based VMWEs and their label-
ing with a set of labels created on morphosyntac-
tic grounds (verb-particle constructions, preposi-
tional verbs, light verb constructions, verb-noun(-
preposition), semi-fixed VMWEs). Vincze (2012)
describes an English-Hungarian parallel corpus
annotated with light verb constructions.

However, what makes the PARSEME action
stand out is the multilingual perspective on
VMWEs: the semantic, syntactic and morphologi-
cal variations were considered in all the languages
involved and unified annotation guidelines were
created and used in the annotation of corpora for
all these languages, allowing for interlingual com-
parison to a certain extent.

3 Romanian Verbal Multiword
Expressions

Multiword Expressions (MWEs) are defined as
“idiosyncratic interpretations that cross word
boundaries” (Sag et al., 2002). They are consid-
ered “a pain in the neck for the NLP applications”,
due to their variation and discontinuities. Ver-
bal MWEs are defined as “multiword expressions
whose canonical form is such that their syntac-

tic head is a verb V and their other lexical com-
ponents form phrases directly dependent on V”
(Savary et al., 2018).

Romanian participated in both preparatory
phases of the PARSEME shared tasks. The results
obtained, namely the identification of types appli-
cable to Romanian and the corpus annotated with
these types of VMWEs, got enhanced from ver-
sion 1.0 to version 1.1 (the number of sentences
in the corpus was increased with 5,203, which
implied an increase with 1,351 of the number of
annotated VMWEs) and the presentation that fol-
lows pertains to the latter. Out of the categories of
VMWEs1 defined in this edition, we present below
only the ones applicable to Romanian:

1. universal categories - valid for all languages
participating in the task. They are further di-
vided into:

(a) Light Verb Constructions (LVC), i.e.
VMWEs consisting of a light verb and
a noun denoting an event or state. Two
subcategories are specified for them:

i. LVC.full - in which the verb is se-
mantically bleached: ex. a avea ac-
ces (to have access);

ii. LVC.cause - in which the verb adds
a causative meaning to the noun: ex.
a pune capăt (to put end “to end”);

(b) Verbal Idioms (VID), including all
VMWEs not belonging to other cate-
gories, and most often having a high de-
gree of semantic non-compositionality:
ex. a o lua la goană (to CLT3sgfemAcc
take at rush “to run away”);

2. quasi-universal categories - valid for some
languages in the action. From this category
only one type was annotated in Romanian:

(a) Inherently Reflexive Verbs (IRV), which
consist of a verb and a reflexive clitic.
A VMWE is annotated as an IRV if (a)
it never occurs without the clitic, or (b)
the reflexive and non-reflexive versions
of the verb have different meanings or
subcategorization frames: ex. a se face
(to SE make “to become”). The reflex-
ive inflects for case (accusative and da-
tive), for person and number in Roma-
nian.

1See also http://parsemefr.lif.univ-mrs.fr/parseme-st-
guidelines/1.1/?page=030CategoriesofV MWEs



15

Edition 1.1 of the PARSEME Shared Task also
includes an experimental and optional VMWE
category, called Inherently Adpositional Verbs
(IAVs). Such an expression consists of a verb and
a selected preposition or postposition. The anno-
tation of this VMWE type is optional, since the
overlapping with other categories can be quite fre-
quent. Romanian has such verbs, for example a
conta pe (to count on), but they were not anno-
tated.

4 The Corpus

The Romanian corpus is a collection of articles
from the concatenated editions of the Agenda
newspaper. It was chosen because it raises no
intellectual property rights problems, so that we
could make it freely available in the PARSEME
repository2, edition 1.1, under a CC BY 4.0 li-
cense. There are several kinds of texts in it:
columns, press releases, letters to the editor, news
stories, feature stories, editorials, sports stories.
Some repetitive constructions can be spotted, re-
flecting either the fixed style of the types of ar-
ticles or the (permanent) authors’ style. The av-
erage sentence length is about 18 tokens, which is
very close to the average length of the sentences in
CoRoLa, the representative corpus of contempo-
rary Romanian (20.7 tokens/sentence) (Barbu Mi-
titelu et al., 2018).

The corpus annotated with VMWEs is made
up of 56,703 sentences containing 1,015,623 to-
kens, which makes it the biggest corpus in this ac-
tion, however not the richest in VMWEs (Ramisch
et al., 2018), as it contains only 5,891 VMWEs:
their frequency in the corpus is 0.58% VMWEs
(with 1 VMWE in 10 sentences).

The training and test files of the corpus were
sentence split, tokenized, part-of-speech tagged
and lemmatized with the TTL tool (Ion, 2007).
The corpus was automatically syntactically anno-
tated with UDPipe based on the romanian-ud-ro-
2.0-170801.udpipe. The format of the corpus is
cupt (Ramisch et al., 2018). Here is an example of
a sentence from the corpus:

Ea se află acum ı̂n Timişoara.
She SE finds now in Timişoara.
“She is in Timişoara now.”
The format of the file contains 11 columns: the

first one identifies the position of each token in the

2https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11372/LRT-
2842

sentence (here, from 1 to 7: six words and one
punctuation mark). The second column contains
the token, the third one - its lemma, the fourth
column - its morphological category, the fifth -
the morphosyntactic description of the token. For
Romanian, the specifications for morphosyntactic
description were created in the MULTEXT-East
project (Dimitrova et al., 1998). The sixth col-
umn contains the same information in the format
attribute=value, the seventh column identifies the
syntactic head of the respective word by referring
to its position in the sentence (column 1). The
eighth column contains the name of the syntactic
relation holding between the word and its head.
The syntactic relations pertain to UD version 1.4.
The ninth column contains no information (it is
always ), the tenth one contains information only
when the respective token is not followed by a
blank space (usually when a punctuation mark fol-
lows or when words are hyphenated), while the
last one contains the VMWEs annotation, when it
is the case, otherwise it contains a star (*). Each
occurrence of a VMWE in a sentence is counted
starting from 1.

# text = Ea se află acum ı̂n Timişoara.

1 Ea el PRON
Pp3fsr--------s Case=Acc,Nom|
Gender=Fem|Number=Sing|Person=3|
PronType=Prs|Strength=Strong 3
nsubj _ _ *

2 se sine PRON
Px3--a--------w Case=Acc|
Person=3|PronType=Prs|Reflex=Yes|
Strength=Weak 3 expl:pv
_ _ 1:IRV

3 află afla VERB
Vmip3s Mood=Ind|Number=Sing|
Person=3|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin
0 root _ _ 1

4 acum acum ADV Rgp
Degree=Pos 3 advmod _
_ *

5 ı̂n ı̂n ADP Spsa
AdpType=Prep|Case=Acc 6 case
_ _ *

6 Timişoara Timişoara



16

PROPN Np _ 3 obl _
SpaceAfter=No *

7 . . PUNCT PERIOD
_ 3 punct _ _ *

In order to determine the span of a VMWE all
its components contain the same number on the
last column. Only for the first element (in linear
order) is this number followed by the VMWE type
label. When one word belongs to two VMWEs
(overlapping VMWEs), it bears two numbers: in
the sentence beginning rendered below (Când s-
a lăsat ı̂ntunericul... When S-has left dark-the...
“When it got dark...”) we can see the VMWE
s- lăsat (IRV) is part of the VMWE s- lăsat
ı̂ntunericul (VID). There are 53 such cases of over-
lapping VMWEs in the corpus, affecting not more
than two words of each of the overlapping expres-
sions (Savary et al., 2018).

1 Când când ADV Rw
PronType=Int,Rel 4 advmod _
_ *

2 s- sine PRON
Px3--a--y-----w Case=Acc|
Person=3|PronType=Prs|Reflex=Yes|
Strength=Weak|Variant=Short 4
expl:pv _ SpaceAfter=No
1:IRV;2:VID

3 a avea AUX Va--3s
Number=Sing|Person=3 4 aux
_ _ *

4 lăsat lăsa VERB
Vmp--sm Gender=Masc|Number=
Sing|VerbForm=Part 13 advcl
_ _ 1;2

5 ı̂ntunericul ı̂ntuneric
NOUN Ncmsry Case=Acc,Nom|
Definite=Def|Gender=Masc|Number=
Sing 4 nsubj _
SpaceAfter=No 2

5 The Annotation Process

The annotation process was performed by a team
of three native speaker linguists, according to the

PARSEME guidelines3, edition 1.1, using a dedi-
cated web platform, FLAT4.

The annotation process consists of two stages:
the identification of a VMWE and its classifica-
tion into one of the aforementioned categories. A
number of Structural Tests have been defined, in
order to help the annotators determine the type of
a VMWE. The annotation was followed by consis-
tency check and homogenization with the help of
a tool developed and made available by the shared
task organizers (Savary et al., 2018), improv-
ing the results: inconsistency among annotators
were eliminated, skipped VMWEs were found and
annotated, incorrectly identified VMWEs were
unannotated.

A set of 2,503 sentences was double-annotated
and it was used by the organizers of the shared
task for calculating the inter-annotator agreement
scores (Ramisch et al., 2018) in order to assess
the quality of the annotation, as well as the task
difficulty. Two aspects were considered: VMWE
span and their categorization. For the former, the
Fspan score, i.e. the MWE-based F-measure when
considering that one annotator tries to predict the
other one’s annotation, is 0.533, while Kspan, i.e.
the agreement between annotators on the VMWE
span, is 0.491.

Table 1 provides statistics of the Romanian cor-
pus annotated for the edition 1.1 of the PARSEME
Shared Task.

Entity Number
Sentences 56,703
Tokens 1,015,623
VID 1,611
LVC.full 313
LVC.cause 183
IRV 3,784
TOTAL VMWEs 5,891

Table 1: Statistical data about the Romanian corpus.

6 Characteristics of the Annotated
Romanian VMWEs

As compared to other languages. As seen in
Table 1, the category IRV is the best represented
in the Romanian corpus. Reflexive verbs are the

3http://parsemefr.lif.univ-mrs.fr/parseme-st-
guidelines/1.1/?page=home

4https://flat.readthedocs.io/en/latest/



17

most frequent type of VMWEs also in Bulgarian,
Spanish and Polish, according to the data provided
by the shared task v. 1.1 organizers5. However,
it is interesting that the Romance languages (Ro-
manian among them) participating in the task dis-
play differences both with respect to the types of
VMWEs they contain and to their distribution in
the corpora. On the other hand, we have to keep in
mind the fact that these corpora do not contain the
same kind of texts (Ramisch et al., 2018) or their
type is even unknown (Savary et al., 2018). Even
so, we can say that Romanian stands alone among
Romance languages and displays characteristics of
some Slavic languages in this respect.

Diversity in the corpus. The 5,891 occurrences
of VMWEs are forms of 486 unique VMWEs, as
seen in Table 2: the second column presents the
total number of occurrences of each type in the
corpus, the third column – the number of unique
VMWEs of each type, the fourth one – the relative
frequency of each type, while the last column con-
tains the number of VMWEs occurring only once
in the corpus (hapax legomena). We can see the
high frequency of each VMWE type. This corre-
lates with the repetitive nature of the texts in the
corpus, as mentioned in section 4. Moreover, 122
(about a quarter) of all VMWEs are hapax legom-
ena. This implies an even higher real relative fre-
quency of the other VMWEs. This distribution is
suggestive of the low diversity of VMWEs in the
corpus (see also the discussion about verbs pro-
ductivity in VMWEs in section 6).

Type #occ. unique % occ. #hapax
VID 1,611 171 9 65
LVC.
full 313 39 8 8
LVC.
cause 183 8 22 3
IRV 3,784 268 14 46
TOTAL 5,891 486 12 122

Table 2: Distribution of VMWEs in the corpus.

Here is a list with the most frequent 5 VMWEs
of each category: between brackets we noted the
frequency of each VMWE. One can notice that

5The distribution of the types and frequency of
VMWEs in these languages are available at http:
//multiword.sourceforge.net/PHITE.php?
sitesig=CONF&page=CONF_04_LAW-MWE-CxG_
2018___lb__COLING__rb__&subpage=CONF_40_
Shared_Task

there are several very frequent ones, especially
IRVs, and the frequency drops drastically with the
second (in case of LVC.full), the third (in case of
LVC.cause) or of the fifth (in case of VID) expres-
sion in the series:

VID: avea loc (have place “take place”) (683),
avea dreptul (have right-the “have the right”)
(104), avea ı̂n vedere (have in sight “have in
mind”) (81), fi vorba (be speech “be about”) (79),
trimite ı̂n judecată (send in judgement “send to
court”)(28);

IRV: se desfăşura (SE unfold “take place”)
(432), se afla (SE found “exist”) (296), se adresa
(SE address “address”) (201), se putea (SE can “be
possible”) (190), se prezenta (SE present “go”)
(112);

LVC.full: face parte (make part “be part”)
(127), lua parte (take part) (27), lua decizie (take
decision “make a decision”) (19), avea acces
(have access) (19), lua hotărâre (take decision
“make a decision”) (13);

LVC.cause: pune la dispoziţie (put at disposal
“make available”) (92), pune ı̂n vânzare (put in
sale “put up for sale”) (68), pune capăt (put end
“put an end”) (9), pune ı̂n circulaţie (put in cir-
culation “circulate”) (6), pune ı̂n pericol (put in
danger) (3).

Average length. The examples given above
also show the reduced length of Romanian
VMWEs. Their average length is 2.15 words per
VMWE. The longest VMWE is a VID: bea până
la ultima picătură paharul amar (drink to at last
drop glass-the bitter “suffer to the very end”).
However, as shown by Savary et al. (2018), this is
the case with almost all languages in the initiative.
The discussion below about the internal structure
of VMWEs sheds more light on the understanding
of the Romanian VMWEs length.

Verbs productivity. There are two verbs that
occur in three types of VMWEs: da (give) and
pune (put). Their productivity in each VMWE
types is rendered in Table 3. Noteworthy, they are
the only verbs creating LVC.cause expressions in
this corpus.

Verb VID LVC.full LVC.cause
da 23 7 2
pune 22 4 6

Table 3: Productivity of two verbs

With respect to LVC.full, there is one verb more

http://multiword.sourceforge.net/PHITE.php?sitesig=CONF&page=CONF_04_LAW-MWE-CxG_2018___lb__COLING__rb__&subpage=CONF_40_Shared_Task
http://multiword.sourceforge.net/PHITE.php?sitesig=CONF&page=CONF_04_LAW-MWE-CxG_2018___lb__COLING__rb__&subpage=CONF_40_Shared_Task
http://multiword.sourceforge.net/PHITE.php?sitesig=CONF&page=CONF_04_LAW-MWE-CxG_2018___lb__COLING__rb__&subpage=CONF_40_Shared_Task
http://multiword.sourceforge.net/PHITE.php?sitesig=CONF&page=CONF_04_LAW-MWE-CxG_2018___lb__COLING__rb__&subpage=CONF_40_Shared_Task
http://multiword.sourceforge.net/PHITE.php?sitesig=CONF&page=CONF_04_LAW-MWE-CxG_2018___lb__COLING__rb__&subpage=CONF_40_Shared_Task


18

productive than them: face (“do/make”) occurs in
12 different LVC.full expressions. The verb lua
(“take”) is as productive as da: it heads 7 ex-
pressions. Other verbs in LVC.full VMWEs are:
avea (“have”) – productivity: 6, aduce (“bring”)
– productivity: 2, and intra (“enter”) – productiv-
ity: 1. With respect to aduce we remark the fact
that the two expressions it heads are synonymous:
aduce contribuţia and aduce aportul (“bring con-
tribution”).

As far as VID MWEs are concerned, they are,
on the one hand, the most numerous among the
VMWEs if we exclude IRVs, and, on the other
hand, they display a large variety of head verbs:
there are 47 different verbs heading VIDs, 22 of
them occurring in only one expression. Besides da
and pune, which are the most productive for this
type, the next five most productive ones are: lua
(“take”) – 17 VIDs, avea (“have”) – 13 VIDs, face
(“do/make”) – 13 VIDs, ţine (“hold”) – 6 VIDs,
and aduce (“bring”) – 5 VIDs.

We cannot discuss of verbal productivity in case
of IRVs.

Internal syntactic structure. With respect to
IRVs, we can mention that in Romanian they may
take either an Accusative or a Dative clitic. In
this corpus, most of them take an accusative clitic,
which reflects, in fact, their general occurrence in
language.

However, we can identify several internal struc-
tures in case of LVC.cause, LVC.full and VID ex-
pressions.

LVC.cause. Although neither frequent nor nu-
merous, the expressions of this type display one of
the two internal structures:

1. verb + indefinite noun (functioning as a direct
object): e.g. da foc (give fire, “put on fire”).
This structure is displayed by 3 VMWEs;

2. verb + preposition + indefinite noun: e.g.:
pune ı̂n circulaţie (put in circulation “cir-
culate”). This structure is displayed by 5
VMWEs.

LVC.full. They display the same two types of
structures as LVC.cause. However, what distin-
guishes them is the fact that these structures show
some variation in the case of LVC.full.

1. The structure verb + noun presents the fol-
lowing subtypes:

(a) verb + definite singular noun: e.g.
face apariţia (make appearance-the “ap-
pear”) – there are 8 such VMWEs;

(b) verb + indefinite singular noun: e.g.: da
citire (give reading “read”) – there are
17 such VMWEs;

(c) verb + noun (without restriction on its
form): e.g.: da declaraţie (give dec-
laration “declare”) – there are 8 such
VMWEs;

(d) verb + indefinite plural noun: e.g.: da
asigurări (give assurances “assure”) –
one such VMWE was found;

2. The structure verb + preposition + indefi-
nite singular noun does not have any sub-
types: e.g.: intra ı̂n coliziune (enter in col-
lision “collide”) – 5 expressions display this
structure.

The structure without preposition is more fre-
quent than the one with preposition in the case of
LVC.full, whereas in the case of LVC.cause the
one with preposition is more frequent.

VID. This type of VMWEs is characterized by
internal structural variation: most VIDs are short,
containing 2 words, one of them being the verb.
The first two structures below are the most fre-
quent, while the others are attested by several
VMWEs:

1. verb + noun: 81 VIDs. Several subtypes can
be distinguished:

• the noun is the subject of the verb: 4
VIDs: e.g.: fura somnul (steal sleep-the
“fall asleep”);

• the noun is the direct object of the verb:
77 cases. The noun can be:

– syntactically unmodified: 65 cases:
e.g: prinde viaţă (catch life “come
to life”);

– modified by an adjective (in the
canonical word order in Romanian,
i.e. noun + adjective): 4 cases: da
undă verde (give wave green “give
the go-ahead”);

– modified by preposition + noun: 4
cases: aduce o rază de lumină (bring
a ray of light “bring hope”);

– modified by a genitive: 2 cases:
vedea lumina zilei (see light-the day-
of-the “be born”);



19

– modified by a defining relative
clause: 2 VIDs, which are, in fact,
synonyms: face tot ce stă ı̂n put-
ere and face tot ce stă ı̂n putinţă
(make all that stay in power “do
one’s best”);

2. verb + prepositional phrase (PP): 72 cases
with the following subtypes:

• the PP is made up of a preposition and a
noun: 65 cases: ı̂nceta din viaţă (cease
from life “die”); in 2 of these cases the
non-anaphoric feminine accusative per-
sonal clitic o functions as an expletive:
o lua de la capăt (CL3SgFemAcc take
from end “start again”);

• the PP is made up of a preposition and
a modified noun: it can be modified by
an adjective, by a genitive noun or by
a prepositional phrase - 4 cases: e.g.,
nu privi cu ochi buni (not watch with
eyes good “disfavour”). Notice here the
negative form of the VMWE, which is
mandatory;

• the PP is made up of a preposition and
an adjective: 2 cases: trece la cele
veşnice (pass to the eternal “die”). The
demonstrative determiner is obligatory
in this VMWE, but this is not the case
with all PPs of this kind;

• the PP is made up of a preposition and
a participle: 1 case: lăsa de dorit (leave
of desired “fall short”);

3. verb + two syntactic arguments: 10 cases.
Several subtypes exist here as well:

• direct object and indirect object: only
one such VID could be found: pune
capăt vieţii (put end life-to “commit sui-
cide”);

• subject and a PP functioning as a place
adverbial: 3 cases: ı̂ngheţa sângele ı̂n
vine (freeze blood-the in veins “get cold
feet”);

• direct object and a PP: 6 cases: e.g.
găsi drumul ı̂n viaţă (find road-the in life
“find one’s way in life”). We found one
VID in which: the PP precedes the di-
rect object, the PP contains a compound
preposition, the noun in the PP is pre-
ceded by a prenominal adjective, the di-

rect object noun is modified by an ad-
jective: bea până la ultima picătură pa-
harul amar (drink up to last drop glass-
the bitter “suffer to the very end”);

4. verb + adverb: 4 cases: da afară (give outside
“remove from job, eliminate”);

5. varia - there are 4 VIDs that have various
structures that do not fall under any of the
previous types and we will not detail them
here.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we presented the Romanian
PARSEME corpus annotated with VMWEs in the
edition 1.1 of the shared task. The corpus offers in-
sights into the use of VMWEs in a journalistic cor-
pus made up of concatenated editions of the same
newspaper. The characteristics identified for the
VMWEs are not meant to be a general characteri-
zation of Romanian VMWEs, they pertain only to
the expressions occurring in this corpus.

Such a corpus-based study completes the
lexicon-based ones (Căpăţână, 2007) or the gen-
eral, descriptive ones. In a multilingual con-
text, we offer not only descriptions of Romanian
VMWEs of preestablished types, but we also no-
tice frequencies of types and productivity of head
verbs. The analysis could be extended with mor-
phological or syntactic remarks on the behaviour
of these verbs: how grammatical categories are
blocked by the participation to such expressions,
how selectional restrictions are affected by this,
what syntactic alternations, such as voice, are also
blocked, etc.

Given the universal annotation guidelines, the
corpus can be used in comparative linguistic stud-
ies, from various perspectives revealed by the data.

8 Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a grant of the Ro-
manian Ministry of Research and Innovation, PC-
CDI - UEFISCDI, project number PN-III-P1-1.2-
PCCDI-2017-0818/73, within PNCDI III.

References

Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword
expressions.



20

Verginica Barbu Mititelu and Svetlozara Leseva. 2018.
Derivation in the domain of multiword expressions,
pages 215–246. Language Science Press, Berlin.

Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Dan Tufiş, and Elena Irimia.
2018. The Reference Corpus of the Contemporary
Romanian Language (CoRoLa). In Proceedings of
the Eleventh International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki,
Japan. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Mathieu Constant, Glen Eryiit, Johanna Monti, Lon-
neke van der Plas, Carlos Ramisch, Michael Rosner,
and Amalia Todirascu. 2017. Multiword expression
processing: A survey. Computational Linguistics,
43(4):837–892.

Cecilia Căpăţână. 2007. Elemente de frazeologie. Edi-
tura Universitaria, Craiova.

Florica Dimitrescu. 1958. Locuţiunile verbale ı̂n limba
română (The verbal locutions in Romanian). EA,
Bucureşti.

Ludmila Dimitrova, Tomaz Erjavec, Nancy Ide,
Heiki Jaan Kaalep, Vladimir Petkevic, and Dan Tu-
fis. 1998. Multext-east: Parallel and comparable
corpora and lexicons for six central and eastern Eu-
ropean languages. In Proceedings of the 36th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and 17th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, Volume 1, pages 315–
319, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Uxoa Iñurrieta, Itziar Aduriz, Ainara Estarrona, Itziar
Gonzalez-Dios, Antton Gurrutxaga, Ruben Urizar,
and Iñaki Alegria. 2018. Verbal multiword ex-
pressions in basque corpora. In Proceedings of
the Joint Workshop on Linguistic Annotation, Mul-
tiword Expressions and Constructions (LAW-MWE-
CxG-2018), pages 86–95, Santa Fe, New Mexico,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Eugen Ioaniţescu. 1956. Locuţiunile. Limba română,
6:48–54.

Radu Ion. 2007. Word Sense Disambiguation Methods
Applied to English and Romanian. PhD Thesis, Ro-
manian Academy.

Akihiko Kato, Hiroyuki Shindo, and Yuji Matsumoto.
2018. Construction of large-scale english verbal
multiword expression annotated corpus. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, pages 2495–2499, Miyazaki, Japan.
European Language Resource Association.

Svetla Koeva, Cvetana Krstev, Duko Vitas, Tita Kyr-
iacopoulou, Claude Martineau, and Tsvetana Dim-
itrova. 2018. Semantic and syntactic patterns of
multiword names: A cross-language study, pages
31–62. Language Science Press, Berlin.

Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Federico Sangati,
Carla Parra Escartn, Agata Savary, Sascha
Bargmann, and Johanna Monti. 2016. PARSEME
Survey on MWE Resources. In Proceedings of
the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages
2299–2306.

Carlos Ramisch, Silvio Ricardo Cordeiro, Agata
Savary, Veronika Vincze, Verginica Barbu Mititelu,
Archna Bhatia, Maja Buljan, Marie Candito, Polona
Gantar, Voula Giouli, Tunga Güngör, Abdelati
Hawwari, Uxoa Iñurrieta, Jolanta Kovalevskaitė, Si-
mon Krek, Timm Lichte, Chaya Liebeskind, Jo-
hanna Monti, Carla Parra Escartı́n, Behrang Qasem-
iZadeh, Renata Ramisch, Nathan Schneider, Ivelina
Stoyanova, Ashwini Vaidya, and Abigail Walsh.
2018. Edition 1.1 of the PARSEME shared task on
automatic identification of verbal multiword expres-
sions. In Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Lin-
guistic Annotation, Multiword Expressions and Con-
structions (LAW-MWE-CxG-2018), pages 222–240,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Monica-Mihaela Rizea, Gianina Iordăchioaia, and
Frank Richter. 2016. A collocational approach to ro-
manian strong negative polarity items. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th International Conference Linguistic
Resources and Tools for Processing the Romanian
Language, pages 173–185.

Victoria Rosén, Koenraad De Smedt, Gyri Smørdal
Losnegaard, Eduard Bejcek, Agata Savary, and
Petya Osenova. 2016. MWEs in Treebanks: From
Survey to Guidelines. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 2323–2330,
Paris, France. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Victoria Rosén, Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Koenraad
De Smedt, Eduard Bejček, Agata Savary, Adam
Przepiórkowski, Petya Osenova, and Verginica
Barbu Mititelu. 2015. A survey of multiword ex-
pressions in treebanks. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Workshop on Treebanks & Linguis-
tic Theories conference, pages 179–193, Warsaw,
Poland.

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
expressions: A pain in the neck for nlp. In Com-
putational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Process-
ing, pages 1–15, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.

Agata Savary, Marie Candito, Verginica Barbu Mi-
titelu, Eduard Bejek, Fabienne Cap, Slavomr pl, Sil-
vio Ricardo Cordeiro, Glen Eryiit, Voula Giouli,
Maarten van Gomple, Yaakov HaCohen-Kerner,
Jolanta Kovalevskaite, Simon Krek, Chaya Liebe-
skind, Johanna Monti, Carla Parra Escartn, Lon-
neke van der Plas, Behrang QasemiZadeh, Carlos
Ramisch, Federico Sangati, Ivelina Stoyanova, and

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-4911
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-4911
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01226001
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01226001


21

Veronika Vincze. 2018. PARSEME multilingual
corpus of verbal multiword expressions, pages 87–
147. Language Science Press, Berlin.

Agata Savary, Manfred Sailer, Yannick Parmen-
tier, Michael Rosner, Victoria Rosén, Adam
Przepiórkowski, Cvetana Krstev, Veronika Vincze,
Beata Wójtowicz, Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Carla
Parra Escartı́n, Jakub Waszczuk, Mathieu Con-
stant, Petya Osenova, and Federico Sangati. 2015.
PARSEME – PARSing and Multiword Expressions
within a European multilingual network. In 7th Lan-
guage & Technology Conference: Human Language
Technologies as a Challenge for Computer Science
and Linguistics (LTC 2015), Poznań, Poland.

Amalia Todiraşcu, Christopher Gledhill, and Dan Ste-
fanescu. 2009. Extracting collocations in contexts.
In Human Language Technology. Challenges of the
Information Society, pages 336–349, Berlin, Heidel-
berg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Amalia Todirascu and Mirabela Navlea. 2015. Align-
ing Verb+Noun Collocations to Improve a French -
Romanian FSMT System. In MUMTTT workshop,
pages 82–99, Malaga, Spain.

Veronika Vincze. 2012. Light verb constructions
in the SzegedParalellFX English–Hungarian paral-
lel corpus. In Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC-2012), pages 2381–2388, Istanbul,
Turkey. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/177_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/177_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/177_Paper.pdf

