



















































An Impossible Dialogue! Nominal Utterances and Populist Rhetoric in an Italian Twitter Corpus of Hate Speech against Immigrants


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online, pages 163–171
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

163

An Impossible Dialogue! Nominal Utterances and Populist Rhetoric in an
Italian Twitter Corpus of Hate Speech against Immigrants

Gloria Comandini
Dipartimento di Lettere e Filosofia

Università degli Studi di Trento, Italy
gloria.comandini@unitn.it

Viviana Patti
Dipartimento di Informatica

Università degli Studi di Torino, Italy
patti@di.unito.it

Abstract
The paper proposes an investigation on the role
of populist themes and rhetoric in an Italian
Twitter corpus of hate speech against immi-
grants. The corpus has been annotated with
four new layers of analysis: Nominal Utter-
ances, that can be seen as consistent with pop-
ulist rhetoric; In-out-group rhetoric, a very
common populist strategy to polarize public
opinion; Slogan-like nominal utterances, that
may convey the call for severe illiberal poli-
cies against immigrants; News, to recognize
the role of newspapers (headlines or reference
to articles) in the Twitter political discourse on
immigration featured by hate speech. The re-
sults show that populist themes compose 1/3
of the hate speech, displaying not only In-
Out-group rhetoric, but also authoritarianism,
mostly carried by Slogan-like nominal utter-
ances. It also appears that news don’t convey
much hate speech, while they compose almost
half of the non hateful tweets.

1 Introduction

Political populism is a pervasive phenomenon ob-
served in several different world regions and ages,
but it recently gained increasing attention due to
the growing electoral consensus around populist
parties in many countries. Even if it is difficult
for scholars to converge on a precise definition
of populism, a phenomenon which is intrinsically
featured by an ever-shifting nature, multifaceted
national varieties and unexpected electoral trajec-
tories (Mazzoleni, 2014), most scholars agree in
defining it as an ideology considering society to be
separated into two homogeneous and antagonistic
groups, the pure people versus the corrupt élite,
and arguing that politics should be expression of
the “general will” of the people (Mudde, 2004).
However, “the people” is a vague concept denot-
ing an artificial group: on one hand, everyone can
identify themselves, projecting their identity on it

(Reinemann et al., 2016; Sauer et al., 2018), on
the other hand anyone can be the enemy of “the
people”, as they just need to be presented as hos-
tile, dangerous and foreign to an apparently ho-
mogeneous people group. Populist rhetoric heav-
ily relies on these themes and can be empirically
understood through its communicative strategies
(Kriesi, 2014). Usually, it is based on “divid-
ing people according to national, ethnic, religious
belonging or according to their gender and sex-
ual orientation into ‘good/‘bad, ‘us/‘them or ‘the
élite’/‘the people (Sauer et al., 2018). Thus, it is
featured by an in/out-group rhetoric (Sauer et al.,
2018), where the out-group is perceived as uni-
form and depicted as a threat, being also regarded
as inferior (Mazzoleni and Bracciale, 2018).

Such rhetorical strategy has been observed by
scholars in several political debates in different
word regions and languages, from US to Italy,
where political leaders exploit such dichotomy
to polarize public opinion, using a repetitive
discourse, simple syntax and vernacular lexicon
(Wodak, 2018).

Another worrying aspect which is featuring the
political discourse on social media is hate speech.
Hate speech dehumanize its targets, reinforcing
the sense of identity of the haters (Gagliardone,
2014). This places hate speech near the rhetorical
strategies of populism: in fact, we can recognize
an in-group (haters) and an out-group (hated) in
hate speech too. Moreover, when hate speech is
produced by leaders of populist parties, it targets
a very specific group of people in order to create a
scapegoat, see for instance the case of immigrants,
having a role in several contemporary political de-
bates.

Given such theoretical framework from social
sciences, this work proposes an extension of the
Italian Twitter corpus of Hate Speech (HS) against
immigrants (Sanguinetti et al., 2018). This new



164

extension, named POP-HS-IT, is oriented to offer
a new dimension of analysis to understand how the
political discourse on immigrants and hate speech
convey populist views (RQ1), how it is conveyed
by the spontaneous writings of individual citi-
zens or by the reference to newspapers (RQ2), or
eventually through slogan-like nominal utterances
(RQ3).

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we will present some background studies on pop-
ulism and hate speech in social media and on nom-
inal utterances. In Section 3, we will describe the
Italian Twitter Corpus of Hate Speech against Im-
migrants, its original annotation scheme and the
sample we analyzed, POP-HS-IT. In Section 4, we
will illustrate the new annotation layers we used
to investigate the relationship between populism
and hate speech in POP-HS-IT, describing every
layer individually and reporting information on the
inter-annotator agreement. In Section 5, we will
present and discuss the results of the annotation,
analyzing the presence of news and nominal ut-
terances, then focusing on the role of slogan-like
nominal utterances and, in the end, on the dualis-
tic constructions of in/out-group rhetoric. In the
Conclusions results are summarized in the light of
the initial RQs and some proposals of future works
are discussed.

2 Background

Populism and hate speech in social media. Al-
though there are many definitions of hate speech,
for the current study we will refer to it as a lan-
guage “that is abusive, insulting, intimidating, ha-
rassing, and/or incites to violence, hatred, or dis-
crimination. It is directed against people on the
basis of their race, ethnic origin, religion, gender,
age, physical condition, disability, sexual orien-
tation, political conviction, and so forth (Erjavec
and Kovai, 2012).

In the last years, in many countries Twitter has
become a very prominent online space for shar-
ing knowledge and opinions, becoming a privi-
leged medium also for political communication,
and a powerful tool in the hands of populist lead-
ers. In fact, social networks like Twitter are, on
the one hand, “distributed, non-hierarchical and
democratic” and, on the other hand, an alternative
to the mainstream media, which many support-
ers of populist parties strongly distrust (Bartlett,
2014).

Thus, Twitter is a good ground for observing
populist rhetoric, and therefore populism-driven
hate speech (Mazzoleni and Bracciale, 2018). But
even without populist themes, xenophobic hate
speech against immigrants is consistent on Twit-
ter. When we focus on Italy, as described in
(Sanguinetti et al., 2018), in the Italian Twit-
ter Corpus of Hate Speech against Immigrants
13% of the tweets have been annotated as hate
speech. The phenomenon is monitored daily
on the http://mappa.controlodio.it/
platform, where its diffusion can be observed
at different geographic levels of granularity (en-
tire Italian territory, regions, provinces) (Capozzi
et al., 2018).

Nominal utterances. For the annotation of nom-
inal utterances, we will use the definition and
the annotation framework of a specialistic cor-
pus, COSMIANU (Corpus Of Social Media Ital-
ian Annotated with Nominal Utterances) (Coman-
dini et al., 2018).

Nominal utterances (NUs), intended as syntac-
tic declarative constructions built around a non-
verbal head, are a very ancient and a very com-
mon linguistic phenomenon. In fact, we can find
NUs in many ancient and current Indo-European,
Slavic and Semitic languages (such as Latin, En-
glish, Spanish, French, Italian Hebrew, Arabic and
Russian) as well as in Finno-Ugric and Bantu lan-
guages (Benveniste, 1990; Simone, 2013).

Some past investigations (Cresti, 1998; Lan-
dolfi et al., 2010; Garcia-Marchena, 2016) have
shown that NUs occur with a moderately high
frequency in spoken language. Moreover, it has
been proved that NUs are very common in journal-
istic writings (especially in the headlines) (Mor-
tara Garavelli, 1971; Dardano and Trifone, 2001)
and in social media texts, (Ferrari, 2011; Coman-
dini et al., 2018), which are a fertile ground for
NUs. Indeed, the informal and fast nature of this
kind of communication media probably makes the
expression via short messages, often without any
explicit hierarchical relationship, preferable.

A first experiment on the annotation of NUs
in an Italian computer-mediated communication
dataset is presented in (Comandini et al., 2018)
and resulted in the development of the COSMI-
ANU corpus, with 20,6% of the sentences contain-
ing an NU. A set of preliminary experiments on
automatic NUs identification has been performed
relying on this corpus, using an SVM classifier.



165

The best configuration of features analyzed (two-
word window context, tokens, lemma and Part-Of-
Speech) provided results that, in terms of Preci-
sion, Recall, and F1 (79.80, 67.96, 73.40), out-
performed the baseline by over 43 points (33.80,
27.13, 30.10) (Comandini et al., 2018).

Analyzing the hate speech on a Twitter corpus
with NUs should provide more information about
the way in which aggressive messages are con-
veyed by an economical, sharp and fast linguis-
tic phenomenon. In fact, with their simple syn-
tactic form and their inclination to assemble cu-
mulative expressions, NUs can be seen as con-
sistent with populist rhetoric. In this way, we
could investigate the relationship between populist
themes/rhetoric strategies and hate speech, identi-
fying stylistic feature that could be useful for hate
speech detection, and for the comprehension of
hate speech’s underlying connection with populist
political discourse. This seems to be a new a new
approach to hate speech’s study and we are not
aware of other similar researches.

3 Hate Speech Corpus Description

Our starting point is the Italian Twitter Corpus
of Hate Speech against Immigrants (HSC hence-
forth) described in (Sanguinetti et al., 2018) and
recently exploited in the Hate Speech Detection
shared task proposed at the Evalita 2018 evalua-
tion campaign (Bosco et al., 2018). The dataset
includes Twitter messages gathered with a classi-
cal keyword-based approach by filtering the cor-
pus using neutral keywords related to three social
groups deemed as potential HS targets in the Ital-
ian context: immigrants, Muslims and Roma. The
corpus has been manually annotated partly by ex-
perts and partly by Figure Eight contributors and
consists of 6,928 tweets. The main feature of this
corpus is its annotation scheme, designed to en-
code a multiplicity of factors contributing to the
definition of the hate speech notion. The scheme
includes, besides HS tags (no-yes), also HS in-
tensity degree (from 1 to 4 if HS is present, and
0 otherwise), the presence of aggressiveness (no-
weak-strong) and offensiveness (no-weak-strong),
as well as irony and stereotype (no-yes). All the
information about the inter-annotator agreement
concerning these tags can be found in (Sanguinetti
et al., 2018).
Sample Analyzed To investigate the role of NUs
in Twitter racist hate speech and to study the re-

lationship between hate speech, populist rhetoric
and NUs, we selected, annotated and analyzed a
sample of tweets from HSC. This sample (named
POP-HS-IT henceforth) includes all the messages
that convey hate speech in HSC, for a sum of 794
tweets, which has been complemented by a ran-
dom selection of a proportional number of non
hateful messages (949) from the same corpus, as
in Figure 1 (left).

4 The New Annotation Layers

Starting from the conviction that when we study
the hate speech against immigrants on Twitter, we
need also to analyze its relationship with populist
rhetoric, we aim at investigating, on the one hand,
the general behavior of NUs in POP-HS-IT. Fur-
thermore, since we are observing a solid presence
of newspapers headlines on the tweets in POP-
HS-IT, we will enrich the annotation to investi-
gate how much of Twitter’s communication about
immigrants is conveyed and refers to newspaper’s
articles and headlines, with the twofold aim to
study the way populist press is presenting these
themes, and to reflect on how different commu-
nication channels interact in the discourse on im-
migration featured by hate speech. On the other
hand, we intend to study the use of the in-group -
out-group dichotomy, in order to see how populist
themes are expressed in the informal written pro-
duction of Twitter users and also how this relates
with the expression of hate.

In order to investigate on the role of populism
and nominal utterances on hate speech, in POP-
HS-IT we added four new layers of analysis (news,
nominal utterances, in-group - out-group, slo-
gans) to those already existing (hate speech, ag-
gressiveness, offensiveness, irony, stereotype, in-
tensity). All of these novel annotations have been
applied manually by at least two expert annota-
tors (linguists, different genders) according to the
scheme described below1.

4.1 Nominal Utterances
This layer of annotation has been applied to the
whole sample of tweets. It shows if a tweet con-
tains at least one NU; thus it has a binary value (yes
or no), in which no reveals a tweet without NUs.
The tweet marked as yes are also annotated with

1The new guidelines for the annotation of news, in-
group - out-group rhetoric, slogans and NUs can be found
here: https://github.com/GloriaComandini/
Corpora

https://github.com/GloriaComandini/Corpora
https://github.com/GloriaComandini/Corpora


166

Figure 1: Distribution of hate in the initial dataset (left), including a subset of tweets from the Hate Speech Corpus
(Sanguinetti et al., 2018). Distribution of the tags related to the presence of News (right) and Nominal Utterances
(NUs, center) in the final version of the POP-HS-IT corpus.

the following information: number of their NUs
and number of their NUs that convey hate speech.

For the annotation of NUs in the POP-HS-
IT corpus, we mostly referred to the annotation
framework provided for COSMIANU (Comandini
et al., 2018).

However, the peculiar Italian’s variety found in
Twitter, non-standard and heavily filled with hash-
tags, links and other unique strategies of commu-
nication, made clear that some adjustments were
needed.

First of all, we needed to decide how and if
links, hashtags and strategies to address other
users (like the use of @ + username) should have
been included in the NUs. Since some links, hash-
tags and username addressed are an important part
of the message, but without any explicit syntacti-
cal connection to the rest of the tweet, in cases like
(1) and (2), they were excluded from the NU.

(1) #agorarai <NU>Cavolo!
</NU>[...] <NU>O solo gli ital-
iani? </NU>@gennaromigliore

(#agorarai Heck! [...] Or only Italians?
@gennaromigliore)

(2) <NU>Manco allo zoo dai
</NU>https://t.co/GkkqViN7wN

(Not even at the zoo, come on
https://t.co/GkkqViN7wN)

On the contrary, hashtags well integrated in the
syntactic structure of the sentence were included
in the NU, as in (3).

(3) <NU>#Roma, avviato l’iter per il
superamento dei campi #rom </NU>

(#Rome, started the practice for the
overcoming of #Roma’s camps)

The annotation strategy applied on POP-HS-IT
is for the most part the same as in COSMIANU.
We marked as NU every utterance whose main
clause is non-verbal, that is to say an utterance
whose main clause doesn’t have a verb in a finite
form. The major difference with COSMIANU’s
annotation framework is the treatment of subordi-
nate clauses with a verb in a finite form: where
in COSMIANU they were excluded from the ex-
tension of the NU, in this study we included them
in the NU, as in (4). In fact, while in a specific
study of NUs the exclusion of the verbal subordi-
nate may be useful to an automatic recognition of
NUs, in this research being able to read the full
length of a NU is important for a faster compre-
hension of hate speech and the role of NUs in hate
speech.

(4) <NU>Un sottilissimo filo che sep-
ara una “goliardata” dal #razzismo
</NU>

(A very thin line that separates a joke
from racism )

Verbal and non-verbal clauses with a coordina-
tion relation to the NU are treated in the same way
as in COSMIANU, with verbal coordinates sepa-
rated from the NU (see (5)) and non-verbal coor-
dinates included in the NU (see (6)).

(5) <NU>Casa popolare assegnata
all’inquilina, </NU>ma una rom inc-
inta la occupa...

(House for working class people as-
signed to the tenant, but a pregnant
Roma woman occupies it...)

(6) <NU>4 nomadi arrestati per furti,
colpito anche il Vicentino </NU>



167

(4 nomads arrested for thefts, damaged
also the Vicentino)

4.2 News

This layer of annotation has also been applied to
the whole sample of POP-HS-IT’s tweets. Anno-
tators had to distinguish tweets written by private
users with spontaneous comments, from tweets re-
porting news from newspapers; thus, it has a bi-
nary value (no- yes). A tweet from a newspaper (or
that is just the retweet of a newspaper headline),
usually presents the title of the newspaper and/or a
very recognizable structure, as for instance in (7):

(7) Corriere: Tangenti per gli appalti nei
campi rom: chiesto il rinvio...

([The] Courier: Bribes for contracts
in Roma’s camps: requested the indict-
ment)

4.3 In-group vs Out-group

This annotation has been applied only to tweets
featured by hate speech. Indeed it is meant to iso-
late the most common theme of populism, since
we assumed it was also present in hate speech.
This layer has a binary value (no-yes), where yes
is typical of messages like (12):

(8) L’Italia e gli italiani prima di tutto.
L’Europa si faccia carico degli immi-
grati. L’Italia ha altri problemi da risol-
vere

(Italy and Italians first. It’s Europe that
should take on immigrants. Italy has
other problems to solve)

4.4 Slogan

Also this last layer has been applied only on hate
speech tweets with at least one NU, since we were
interested in analyzing how NU in hate speech can
convey populist slogans and a sharp adherence to a
point of view, that the writer doesn’t want to ques-
tion or discuss (see (13)). This layer has a binary
value (no-yes). The slogans are always NUs.

(9) <NU>RIMPATRII IMMEDIATI
FORZATI </NU>

(FORCED IMMEDIATE REPATRIA-
TIONS)

4.5 Annotation process and inter-annotator
agreement

All of these novel annotations have been applied
manually to the data by an expert annotator (Ital-
ian native speaker, linguist). A second indepen-
dent annotation has been applied to the data for
the news and in-group - out-group labels. The re-
sulting inter-annotator agreement in terms of Co-
hen’s kappa is 0.98 for both news and in-group -
out-group. Moreover, as explained in Section 4.1,
we modified the guidelines for NUs’ recognition
with respect to the ones used in (Comandini et al.,
2018)2. Thus, for this task we applied a second
human annotation to the 30% of the POP-HS-IT
dataset. Three expert annotators were employed
on different slices of the data. The resulting agree-
ment in terms of Cohen’s kappa are 0.96, 0.90 and
0.88, respectively. Disagreement has been solved
by fact-checking (for the news) and by construc-
tive discussion among the annotators. Figure1
shows the final distributions of the labels for the
NUs (center) and News (right) annotation layers
in POP-HS-IT. When we focus only on hateful
tweets in POP-HS-IT, the final result concerning
all the annotation layers applied is summarized in
Table 1. Discussion of results follows.

Table 1: Distribution of the labels (NUs, News, Slo-
gans and In/Out-group rhetoric) in the hateful tweets of
the POP-HS-IT corpus. Slogans are a sub-set of NUs.

Hateful tweets
NUs (all) 415
NUs (only slogans) 136
no NUs 379
New 93
no News (personal comments) 701
In-out group rhetoric 165
no In-out group rhetoric 629

5 Results and Discussion

Firstly, the investigation of the reference to news-
paper’s articles showed us that they compose the
33% of POP-HS-IT, as showed in Figure 1 (right).
More exactly, news are remarkably prominent in
non hateful tweets, while they are only a minor
part of the hateful messages.

2For an in-depth description of this framework, see the
annotation guidelines (in Italian) available here: http://
tiny.cc/auhvvy

http://tiny.cc/auhvvy
http://tiny.cc/auhvvy


168

In fact, the non hateful sample (949 tweets) con-
tains 484 news (51%) and 465 comments from sin-
gle users (49%), while the hateful sample (794
tweets) exhibit only 93 news (11,71%) and 701
comments from single users (88,29%), as showed
in Table 1.

So, of course in the non hateful discourse about
immigration the spontaneous opinion of the single
user is still very consistent, but the percentage of
headlines shows us that Twitters communication
on this subject is considerably featured by pub-
lishing or re-tweeting newspapers articles or head-
lines. On the contrary, it seems that hate speech is
not particularly conveyed by references to news-
paper’s articles, or at least newspaper’s headlines
are perceived as more neutral and less hateful.

The presence of NUs is consistent in both the
hateful sample and the non hateful sample, emerg-
ing in 62% of POP-HS-IT, as shown in Figure 1
(middle). However, it appears that hate speech has
less NUs than non hate speech.

In references to newspaper’s articles, both hate-
ful and non hateful, NUs play a significant role.
Non hate speech news (484) have 425 (87,8%)
tweets with NUs and 59 (12,2%) tweets without
NUs, for a total NU’s number of 668 and an av-
erage of 1,57 NUs for each tweet. Similarly, hate
speech news (93) (see Table 1) have 72 (77,42%)
tweets with NUs and 21 (22,58%) tweets without
NUs, for a total NU’s number of 111 and an av-
erage of 1,54 NUs for each tweet. This results
are not surprising, because NUs have already been
know to be very common in newspaper’s articles,
and even more in articles headlines (Mortara Gar-
avelli, 1971); but we are not aware of any other
corpus-based studies on the matter.

Users’ comments, both hateful and non hateful,
have less NUs than newspaper’s articles, and hate-
ful comments have less NUs than non hateful com-
ments. Non hateful tweets from single users are
465 and have 238 (51%) tweets with NUs and 227
(49%) tweets without NUs, for a total NU’s num-
ber of 298 and an average of 1,31 NUs for each
tweet. Hateful comments from single users are
701 (see Table 1) and have 343 (48,93%) tweets
with NUs, and 358 (51,07%) tweets without NUs,
for a total NU’s number of 463 and an average of
1,35 NUs for each tweet.

This distribution of NUs probably means that
this linguistic phenomenon is merely very com-
mon in Twitter’s Italian discourse about immi-

gration, and possibly in Twitter’s Italian in gen-
eral, while Italian hate speech about immigrants
on Twitter doesn’t rely heavily on NUs as we ex-
pected.

5.1 Nominal Utterances and Hate Speech
against Immigrants

As expressed in the previous paragraphs, NUs are
a stable characteristic of Twitter’s Italian discus-
sion about immigrants, and especially they are
typical of newspaper’s headlines (contained often
in both hateful and not hateful tweets). Even if
their presence is not higher in hateful tweets, still,
NUs convey a significant part of hate speech: of
570 total NUs, 329 (57,72%) convey hate speech
(see (10)), while 241 NUs (42,28%) convey other,
non hateful meanings (see (11)). Therefore, most
of the NUs in hate speech are the focus of the hate-
ful message of the tweet. We can find these hate-
ful NUs in 270 tweets (the 34% of all hate speech
tweets) for an average of 1,21 NUs for each tweet.

(10) <NU>vivere in sicurezza senza la
feccia di questi IMMIGRATI e rom im-
puniti che gira in ITALIA </NU>

(Living safely without this scum of un-
punished IMMIGRANTS and Roma who
goes around in ITALY)

(11) <NU>Aumento casi mor-
billo? </NU><NU>Ok.
</NU></NU>Colpa dei vaccini?
</NU>

(Increase of measles cases? Ok. Vac-
cines’ fault? )

These hateful NUs have a close relationship
with slogans. 124 (37,38%) of them can be classi-
fied as slogans. Slogans’ numbers amount to 136
(see Table 1), so the 91,17% of them are composed
by hateful NUs (see (12)), while only 12 (8,83%)
of them don’t convey hateful messages (see exam-
ple (13)).

(12) <NU>tutti fuori clandestini e rom
! </NU>

(illegal immigrants and Roma people,
all out! )

(13) <NU>w l’Italia!! </NU>

(go Italy!! )



169

Slogans are an interesting investigation’s sub-
ject, because they are brief and concise formulae,
easy to memorize and with high expressive value.
Thus, it is interesting to notice that most of these
slogans are used to convey an hateful message,
making it the most highlighted and emphatic part
of the tweet.

Of these slogans, 45 (33,33%) are calls to action
for expelling immigrants from Italy (see (14)), and
almost all them (33) have an Intensity of 3, while
4 have an Intensity of 1, 6 have an Intensity of 2
and 2 have an Intensity of 4. The other slogans ve-
hemently ask for the killing or the imprisonment
of immigrants (see (15)), while slogans with In-
tensity 1 are usually more descriptive, than exhor-
tatory (see (16)).

(14) <NU>RIMPATRII IMMEDIATI
di clandestini rom e stranieri criminali
tutti!!! </NU>

(IMMEDIATE REPATRIATION of ille-
gal immigrants Roma people foreigners
criminals everyone!!! )

(15) <NU>pena capitale x tutti musul-
mani in Europa immediatamente!
</NU>

(death penality for all the Muslims in
Europe immediately! )

(16) <NU>SUBIRE e essere islamiz-
zati </NU>

(ENDURING and being Islamized )

Collectively, these slogans convey a particu-
lar way to express the populism’s in-group - out-
group way of thinking called authoritarianism,
that is the call for “severe political measures or il-
liberal policies against those who threaten the ho-
mogeneity of the people” (Mazzoleni and Brac-
ciale, 2018).

5.2 In-group and Out-group: Dualistic
Constructions

The annotation of in-group - out-group rhetoric
shows us that tweets with this dichotomy are not
as recurring as we thought. In fact, only 165
(20,15%) of the hate speech comments have a in-
group - out-group rhetoric, as showed in Table 1.

This dualistic construction mostly shows an op-
position between Italians, often described as poor

and abandoned by the government, and immi-
grants, depicted as privileged and protected by the
leftist government (see (17)). Thus, unsurpris-
ingly, the analysis’ dimension of stereotypes ex-
hibit a noteworthy score in these tweets: 138 of
them (83,63%) display a stereotyped point of view
(see (18)).

(17) Neanche dopo i disastrosi sismi in
Centro Italia, Renzi blocca i clandes-
tini per devolvere i soldi risparmiati agli
Italiani #migranti

(Not even after the disastrous earth-
quakes in Central Italy, Renzi stops il-
legal immigrants to hand over the saved
money to Italians #migrants )

(18) Gli immigrati africani in Italia, in-
vece, sono ospitati a oziare in alberghi a
3-4 stelle. Bella differenza.

(Instead, African immigrants in Italy are
hosted to laze in 3-4 stars hotels. Nice
difference. )

In 16 cases, this rhetoric is also conveyed by
newspaper’s headlines, illustrating many kinds
of Italians’ struggles caused by immigrants (see
(18)).

(18) #Libero: ”Dieci milioni di euro but-
tati per i rom. Schiaffo all’Italia: guar-
date questi numeri

(#Libero: ”Ten millions of Euros
throwed away for Roma people. A
smack for Italy: look at these numbers
)

It is interesting to see that 75% of these dual-
istic tweets contain at least one NU, for a total
of 127 NUs, 77 (60,62%) of which convey hate
speech. This means that, even with a small num-
ber of newspaper’s articles in their ranks, tweets
with in-group - out-group rhetoric are a very fer-
tile ground for NUs.

Still, these tweets don’t contain slogans very of-
ten: only 26 tweets exhibit both slogans and dual-
istic rhetoric, see for instance (19):

(19) Vergogna, prima pensare agli ital-
iani

(Shame, first think of Italians )



170

This could mean that this rhetoric doesn’t tend
to use slogan-like constructions. Instead, it seems
to rely on more diverse syntactic structures, even
if their lexicon is remarkably limited and with
an hammering repetition of “Italians” and “Italy”,
while the out-group tends to be mentioned exploit-
ing a slightly wider variety of terms (e.g., foreign-
ers, illegal immigrants, immigrants and so on).
This high repetitiveness is also typical of populist
rhetoric.

Still, populist slogans and dualistic tweets, to-
gether, reach a sum of 262 populist hate speech’s
tweet (i.e., 33% of the entire POP-HS-IT). There-
fore, we can say that populism in Twitter’s hate
speech is present, but it tends to acquire more
than one form and to convey non only in/out-group
rhetoric, but also authoritarianism rhetoric.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we proposed a novel study of an Ital-
ian Twitter Corpus of Hate Speech against Im-
migrants (HSC) extended with four new levels
of annotations: nominal utterances, in/out-group
rhetoric, slogans and role of news. We named this
new sample of HSC enriched with new annota-
tion layers POP-HS-IT. Our goal was to investi-
gate how the political discourse on immigrants and
hate speech convey populist views (RQ1), how
these populist views are impacted by newspaper’s
articles (RQ2) or by the spontaneous writings of
single users, and how these populist views are
conveyed through slogan-like nominal utterances
(RQ3). The following answers emerge from our
analysis.

Populist views are present in Twitter’s hate
speech against immigrants (RQ1), but they are not
the majority of it; still, with a total of 257 populist
hate speech’s tweet, populist slogans and in/out-
group dualistic tweets compose a third of the hate
speech in the corpus. They also display the two
most frequent populist themes of Twitter’s hate
speech against immigrants: in/out-group rhetoric
that puts Italians against immigrants, and authori-
tarianism that calls for violent and illiberal actions
against immigrants.

The reference to newspapers articles is very fre-
quent in POP-HS-IT, but they are not perceived
as bearer of hate speech, and therefore they are
less represented also in slogans and in/out-group
rhetoric (RQ2).

Slogan-like NUs are not the majority of the NUs

in the corpus, but most of them convey hateful
contents and are the semantic and pragmatic fo-
cus of the tweet. Also, they exhibit the populist
rhetoric of authoritarianism, often with a medium-
high level of hateful incitement, due to their nature
of violent calls to action (RQ3).

For a complete analysis of this matter it is nec-
essary to investigate more populist themes and the
role of NUs in populist rhetoric. Still, this re-
search starts to shed some light on the role of pop-
ulist themes in hate speech: populist themes are
remarkably present in hate speech against immi-
grants, and they need to be investigated to under-
stand and challenge hate. Moreover, these pop-
ulist themes are likely present in the rhetoric of
populist politicians from all over the world as sug-
gested in (Mazzoleni and Bracciale, 2018). Thus,
the annotation framework of POP-HS-IT can be
used to study the relationship between populism
and hate speech in different social media corpora
and in many languages. In fact, we plan to ap-
ply our analysis also on different available corpora
in several languages (Basile et al., 2019; Waseem
and Hovy, 2016), in order to study differences and
commonalities in different cultures and domains.

Finally, the preliminary analysis of annotation
results proposed opens new perspectives for the
exploitation of the data set and of the new anno-
tation layer for the development of HS detection
systems, which is matter of future investigations.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their insightful comments. We are also grateful
to our colleagues for their valuable help in anno-
tating the corpus. The work of Viviana Patti was
partially funded by Progetto di Ateneo/CSP 2016
(Immigrants, Hate and Prejudice in Social Media,
S1618 L2 BOSC 01).

References
Jamie Bartlett. 2014. Populism, Social Media and

Democratic Strain, pages 99–116. Fores.

Valerio Basile, Cristina Bosco, Elisabetta Fersini,
Debora Nozza, Viviana Patti, Francisco Manuel
Rangel Pardo, Paolo Rosso, and Manuela San-
guinetti. 2019. SemEval-2019 task 5: Multilin-
gual detection of hate speech against immigrants and
women in Twitter. In Proceedings of the 13th Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages
54–63, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. ACL.

https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S19-2007
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S19-2007
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S19-2007


171

Émile Benveniste. 1990. Problemi di linguistica gen-
erale. Mondadori, Milano, Italia.

Cristina Bosco, Felice Dell’Orletta, Fabio Poletto,
Manuela Sanguinetti, and Maurizio Tesconi. 2018.
Overview of the Evalita 2018 Hate Speech De-
tection Task. In Proceedings of the Sixth Eval-
uation Campaign of Natural Language Process-
ing and Speech Tools for Italian. Final Workshop
(EVALITA 2018) co-located with the Fifth Italian
Conference on Computational Linguistics (CLiC-it
2018), Turin, Italy, December 12-13, 2018., vol-
ume 2263 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-
WS.org.

Arthur T. E. Capozzi, Viviana Patti, Giancarlo Ruffo,
and Cristina Bosco. 2018. A data viz platform as
a support to study, analyze and understand the hate
speech phenomenon. In Proceedings of the 2Nd In-
ternational Conference on Web Studies, WS.2 2018,
pages 28–35, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Gloria Comandini, Manuela Speranza, and Bernardo
Magnini. 2018. Effective communication without
verbs? sure! identification of nominal utterances
in italian social media texts. In Proceedings of the
Fifth Italian Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (CLiC-it 2018), Torino, Italy, December 10-12,
2018., volume 2253 of CEUR Workshop Proceed-
ings. CEUR-WS.org.

Emanuela Cresti. 1998. Gli enunciati nominali. In Atti
del IV convegno internazionale SILFI (Madrid 27-
29 giugno 1996), pages 171–191, Pisa. Franco Ce-
sati Editore.

Maurizio Dardano and Pietro Trifone. 2001. La nuova
grammatica della lingua italiana. Zanichelli, Mi-
lano, Italia.

Karmen Erjavec and Melita Poler Kovai. 2012. you
dont understand, this is a new war! analysis of hate
speech in news web sites comments. Mass Commu-
nication and Society, 15:899–920.

Angela Ferrari. 2011. Enunciati nomi-
nali. Enciclopedia dell’Italiano. http:
//www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/
enunciati-nominali_(Enciclopedia_
dell’Italiano)/.

Iginio Gagliardone. 2014. Mapping and analysing hate
speech online. SSRN Electronic Journal.

Oscar Garcia-Marchena. 2016. Spanish Verbless
Clauses and Fragments. A corpus analysis. In CILC
2016. 8th International Conference on Corpus Lin-
guistics, volume 1 of EPiC Series in Language and
Linguistics, pages 130–143. EasyChair.

Hanspeter Kriesi. 2014. The populist challenge. West
European Politics, 37(2):361–378.

Annamaria Landolfi, Carmela Sammarco, and Miriam
Voghera. 2010. Verbless clauses in Italian, Spanish
and English: a Treebank annotation. In S. Bolasco,

I. Chiari, and L. Giuliano, editors, Statistical Analy-
sis of Textual Data. Proceedings of the 10th Interna-
tional Conference on Statistical Analysis of Textual
Data (JADT 2010), pages 450–459. LED, Milan.

Gianpietro Mazzoleni. 2014. Mediatization and politi-
cal populism. In Frank Esser and Jesper Strömbäck,
editors, Mediatization of Politics: Understanding
the Transformation of Western Democracies, pages
42–56. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London.

Gianpietro Mazzoleni and Roberta Bracciale. 2018.
Socially mediated populism: the communicative
strategies of political leaders on facebook. Palgrave
Communications, 4(1):1–10.

Bice Mortara Garavelli. 1971. Fra norma e invenzione:
lo stile nominale. In Accademia della Crusca, editor,
Studi di grammatica italiana, volume 1, pages 271–
315. G. C. Sansoni Editore, Firenze, Italia.

Cas Mudde. 2004. The Populist Zeitgeist. Government
and Opposition, 39(4):541563.

Carsten Reinemann, Toril Aalberg, Frank Esser, Jesper
Strmbck, and Claes de Vreese. 2016. Populist Polit-
ical Communication: Toward a Model of Its Causes,
Forms, and Effects, page 1225. Routledge.

Manuela Sanguinetti, Fabio Poletto, Cristina Bosco,
Viviana Patti, and Marco Stranisci. 2018. An Ital-
ian twitter corpus of hate speech against immigrants.
In Proceedings of the 11th Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, Miyazaki, Japan. European
Language Resource Association.

Birgit Sauer, Anna Krasteva, and Aino Saarinen. 2018.
Post-democracy, party politics and right-wing pop-
ulist communication, pages 14–35. Routledge.

Raffaele Simone. 2013. Nuovi fondamenti di linguis-
tica. McGraw-Hill, Milano, Italia.

Zeerak Waseem and Dirk Hovy. 2016. Hateful sym-
bols or hateful people? predictive features for hate
speech detection on twitter. In Proceedings of the
NAACL Student Research Workshop, pages 88–93,
San Diego, California. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Ruth Emily Wodak. 2018. From hate speech to hate
tweets. In M. Pajnik and B. Sauer, editors, Populism
and the Web. Communicative Practices of Parties
and Movements in Europe, pages xvii–xxiii. Rout-
ledge, New York.

https://iris.unito.it/bitstream/2318/1686264/1/paper010.pdf
https://iris.unito.it/bitstream/2318/1686264/1/paper010.pdf
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3240431.3240437
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3240431.3240437
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3240431.3240437
http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/enunciati-nominali_(Enciclopedia_dell'Italiano)/
http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/enunciati-nominali_(Enciclopedia_dell'Italiano)/
http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/enunciati-nominali_(Enciclopedia_dell'Italiano)/
http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/enunciati-nominali_(Enciclopedia_dell'Italiano)/
http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/enunciati-nominali_(Enciclopedia_dell'Italiano)/
http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/enunciati-nominali_(Enciclopedia_dell'Italiano)/
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2601792
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2601792
https://doi.org/10.29007/8tcg
https://doi.org/10.29007/8tcg
https://doi.org/10.1080/01402382.2014.887879
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137275844_3
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137275844_3
https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:pal:palcom:v:4:y:2018:i:1:d:10.1057_s41599-018-0104-x
https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:pal:palcom:v:4:y:2018:i:1:d:10.1057_s41599-018-0104-x
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1443
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1443
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N16-2013
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N16-2013
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N16-2013

