




































PRINCIPLE: Providing Resources in Irish, Norwegian, Croatian 

and Icelandic for the Purposes of Language Engineering 

Andy Way & Federico Gaspari 

ADAPT Centre  

School of Computing 

Dublin City University 

Dublin 9, Ireland 

{Firstname.Lastname}@adaptcentre.ie 

  

 Abstract 

PRINCIPLE is a new 2-year project start-

ing in September 2019 funded by the Eu-

ropean Commission under the Connecting 

Europe Facility (CEF) programme. Paral-

lel data for Croatian, Icelandic, Irish and 

Norwegian are in relatively short supply, 

so that the quality of the eTranslation ma-

chine translation (MT) engines is less than 

would be the case if larger parallel corpora 

were available. PRINCIPLE will gather 

parallel data for these languages and Eng-

lish, evaluate the quality of the gathered 

resources via MT, and deliver corpora 

deemed to be of high quality to eTransla-

tion for improved MT engine training. 

1    Languages, Activities and Partners 

The PRINCIPLE project focuses on the identifi-

cation, collection and processing of language re-

sources (LRs) for four under-resourced European 

languages: Croatian, Icelandic, Irish, and Norwe-

gian (covering both varieties: Bokmål and Ny-

norsk). 

It focuses on providing data to improve translation 

quality in two Digital Service Infrastructures 

(DSIs)1 – eJustice and eProcurement – via do-

main-specific MT engines, over a 2-year period 

(September 2019 to August 2021). 

 

 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. 
1 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-

The main activities in PRINCIPLE are: 

(i) use-case analysis, data requirements and 
data preparation,  

(ii) identification and collection of LRs,  

(iii) development, evaluation and deployment 
of MT systems,  

(iv) exploitation and sustainability, and  

(v) dissemination. 

The project is coordinated by the ADAPT Centre 

at Dublin City University (Ireland), and the part-

ners are Iconic Translation Machines (Dublin, Ire-

land), the University of Zagreb (Croatia), the Na-

tional Library of Norway in Oslo, and the Univer-

sity of Iceland in Rejkyavik. 

2     Data Collection and Verification 

PRINCIPLE will provide high-quality curated 

data via  ELRC-SHARE,2 a repository for docu-

menting, storing, browsing and accessing LRs 

collected through the European Language Re-

source Coordination3 network to feed the CEF 

eTranslation engines. MT engines will be offered 

to the ‘early adopter’ public administration part-

ners in the four countries to validate the LRs col-

lected based on the specific use-cases determined 

by public bodies within each country. 

While public administrations are already able to 

upload their data sets directly to ELRC-SHARE, 

for low-resource languages such as those of focus 

in the project, this has been relatively 

unsuccessful to date. In PRINCIPLE, partners will 

market/en/news/connecting-europe-facility-cef-

digital-service-infrastructures 
2 https://elrc-share.eu/ 
3 http://lr-coordination.eu/ 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 112



avail of their local contacts in each (relatively 

small) country to try to persuade key stakeholders 

of the benefit of releasing corpora in their 

possession, negotiating in each case the most 

permissive terms possible for distribution and 

further reuse.  

 

However, rather than just acting as data collectors, 

and passing data blindly to ELRC-SHARE, the 

ADAPT MT team at DCU, Iconic and the Univer-

sity of Zagreb all have ample experience of build-

ing MT engines, including for the low-resource 

language pairs of the project. Dowling et al. 

(2018) compare statistical MT and neural MT per-

formance for English-Irish; Klubička et al. (2017) 

built Croatian-English neural MT systems with 

superior quality to Google Translate;4 and Gupta 

et al. (2019) addresses the issue of robustness in 

real commercial neural MT systems. 

 

Accordingly, PRINCIPLE will build in-house 

baseline MT engines for each language pair and 

domain, add incremental amounts of data gath-

ered, retrain the MT engines, and only submit data 

to eTranslation if improvements in MT quality are 

clearly visible via both automatic metrics and hu-

man evaluation. 

Once the utility of the datasets has been verified 

in this way by the project partners, parallel data in 

50K sentence-pair batches will be uploaded to 

ELRC-SHARE for use by the eTranslation en-

gines which will be important to break down lan-

guage barriers via MT capability to provide mul-

tilingual access to all DSIs by European and na-

tional public administrations for the languages 

covered under this project. 

As well as these clear benefits to eTranslation, 

public administrations which have agreed to 

partner with the project will be able to use the in-

house MT engines developed by the PRINCIPLE 

technical partners for the duration of the project. 

 

3     Relationship with other CEF Projects 

The experience of evaluating commercial MT sys-

tems for deployment in public administrations in 

the iADAATPA project5 (cf. Castilho et al., 2019) 

will greatly benefit PRINCIPLE. 

PRINCIPLE intends to promote awareness and 

use of National Relay Stations (NRSs), which are 

 
4 http://translate.google.com 
5 http://iadaatpa.com/ 

designed to effectively collect, process and share 

language resources that can be used for MT train-

ing under the European Language Resource Infra-

structure (ELRI) project (Etchegoyen et al., 

2018).6 NRSs have already been made available 

and promoted by ELRI in Ireland, France, Portu-

gal and Spain. PRINCIPLE will encourage the ex-

tension of new NRSs to Croatia, Iceland and Nor-

way for their respective languages.  

Acknowledgements 

PRINCIPLE is generously co-financed by the Eu-

ropean Union Connecting Europe Facility under 

Action 2018-EU-IA-0050 with the specific grant 

agreement INEA/CEF/ICT/A2018/1761837.  

References 

Castilho, Sheila, Natalia Resende, Federico Gaspari, 

Andy Way, Tony O’Dowd, Marek Mazur, Manuel 

Herranz, Alex Helle, Gema Ramirez-Sanchez, Vic-

tor Sanchez-Cartagena, Marcis Pinnis, and Valters 

Sics. 2019. Large-scale Machine Translation Evalu-

ation of the iADAATPA Project. In Proceedings of 

MT Summit XVII, Dublin, Ireland. 

Dowling, Meghan, Teresa Lynn, Alberto Poncelas and 

Andy Way. 2018. SMT versus NMT: Preliminary 

comparisons for Irish. In Proceedings of the AMTA 

2018 Workshop on Technologies for MT of Low Re-

source Languages (LoResMT 2018), Boston, MA., 

pp.12—20. 

Etchegoyhen, Thierry, Borja Anza Porras, Andoni Az-

peitia, Eva Martı́nez Garcia, Paulo Vale, José Luis 

Fonseca, Teresa Lynn, Jane Dunne, Federico Gas-

pari, Andy Way, Victoria Arranz, Khalid Choukri, 

Vladimir Popescu, Pedro Neiva, Rui Neto, Maite 

Melero, David Perez Fernandez, Antonio Branco, 

Ruben Branco and Luis Gomes. 2018. ELRI - Euro-

pean Language Resources Infrastructure. In Pro-

ceedings of The 21st Annual Conference of the Eu-

ropean Association for Machine Translation (EAMT 

2018), Alicante, Spain, p.351. 

Gupta, Rohit , Patrik Lambert, Raj Patel and John Tins-

ley. 2019. Improving Robustness in Real-World 

Neural Machine Translation Engines. In Proceed-

ings of MT Summit XVII, Dublin, Ireland. 

Klubička, Filip, Antonio Toral and Victor Sánchez-

Cartagena. 2017. Fine-grained human evaluation of 

neural versus phrase-based machine translation. The 

Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics 108 

(1): 121—132. 

6 http://www.elri-project.eu/ 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 113


