





























Step-wise Refinement Classification Approach for Enterprise Legal Litigation

Ying Mao , Xian Wang , Jianbo Tang , Changliang Li∗
Kingsoft

{maoying, wangxian, tangjianbo, lichangliang}@kingsoft.com

Abstract
In the field of finance and lawsuit, data mining tech-
nology has absolute broad market prospect but also
is a challenging task. Past years have witnessed
great successes of data mining in finance and law-
suit related applications. Most existing work usu-
ally focus on providing litigation risk assessment
and outcome prediction services for the clients.
However, the research on the legal litigation type
for enterprise is limited. In this paper, we focus
on enterprise lawsuit category prediction and pro-
pose a novel approach to refine the problem as a
classification task. First, We evaluate the possibil-
ity distribution of legal documents received by the
enterprise, then distinguish the specific legal litiga-
tion type. We apply our method on International
Big Data Analysis Competition1 launched by IEEE
ISI Conference 2019 and scored the first place in
the final leader-board.

1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence is developing very rapidly in today’s so-
ciety, so we hope to introduce it into the legal field. From the
rule-based expert legal system (transforming legal experts’ le-
gal knowledge and experience into a computer language in
the form of rules) to the autonomous system supported by
deep learning, machine learning, and big data, the deeper and
broader impact of artificial intelligence on the legal indus-
tries has only just begun. If we can extract valid informa-
tion from the company’s legal information to predict the type
of received legal documents, our work can not only help the
company prepare for litigation in advance, but also provide
early warnings of its operating status.

Litigation/Lawsuit2 is a kind of legal action, which is di-
vided into civil and criminal categories. The former plain-
tiff is the victim’s party, and the law is resorted to because
there are unresolved disputes. The latter involves criminal of-
fences, and the government authorities sue the suspects (pros-
ecution). The proceedings are divided into first and second in-
stance, and may also be final. A lawsuit may involve dispute

∗the corresponding author
1http://www.linkx.ac.cn/#/title
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawsuit

resolution of private law issues between individuals, business
entities or non-profit organizations. The function of litigation
is not limited to the discovery of historical facts that have oc-
curred in the past, but also establishes the link between fault
and responsibility, crime and punishment through the process
of litigation, thereby conveying to citizens a message of how
to behave and accountability.

Enterprises would receive different type of legal litigation
documents for various reasons in the business process, such
as tax evasion, arbitrary discharge of industrial sewage, ar-
rears of payment, etc. Such information which can be ob-
tained from the legal information report of the enterprise is
generally historical time information. The IEEE ISI Con-
ference 2019 launched the International Big Data Analysis
Competition and one of the objective aims to predict the type
of legal documents that are most likely to be received by com-
panies.

In this paper, we propose a new approach using step-wise
refinement strategy to predict the top two most possible legal
litigation types for each publicly traded company. In the first
step, considering whether the legal documents is received by
enterprise, we introduce the binary-classification model. Af-
ter evaluate the possibility distribution of received legal docu-
ments, in the second step multi-class classification processing
will then be performed to identify the specific legal litigation
type. During these steps, the models refine more detailed in-
formation from the output produced by last step. We apply
our method on International Big Data Analysis Competition
and score the first place in the final leader-board. As it turns
out, achieving the remarkable result reveals our step-wise re-
finement approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
techniques in legal litigation prediction field.

2 Related Work
The traditional solution to the task of legal type prediction
is manual judgment, which means experienced professionals
draw conclusions based on relevant data. The main analy-
sis process is generally based on the analysis of the num-
ber, regional distribution, and subject matter of the litigation
cases that the company participates as a litigation participant.
Through analyse the corresponding data, the main types of
litigation cases of the corresponding enterprises in the earlier
period of the data acquisition period can be obtained with a
high probability.

27
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Financial Technology and Natural Language Processing 

(FinNLP@IJCAI 2019), pages 27-33, Macao, China, August 12, 2019.

http://www.linkx.ac.cn/##/title
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawsuit


The first part is the analysis of the litigation case types in
the history of the company. The major categories of litigation
cases are generally criminal, administrative and civil. In fact,
most enterprises is main body of operation in our country and
their main business activities should be based on business be-
haviors of civil and commercial activities, so the development
of disputes and types of litigation are mostly civil and com-
mercial litigation. When civil cases are further subdivided,
they can be distinguished by referring to the provisions of the
Supreme People’s Court on civil cases. The civil case gen-
erally represents the problems existing in the management
methods or business concepts, and may also reflect its op-
erating status and some industry characteristics to a certain
extent. If there are a large number of cases of product quality
disputes, it indicates that the company may have flaws in the
process of product quality control. If there are a large num-
ber of labor dispute cases, it indicates that the company may
have problems such as daily violation of labor contract law
management and large mobility of industry personnel due to
poor management. If an enterprise has an administrative case
or a criminal case, there are serious illegal activities on behalf
of the company’s production and management behavior, such
as meat product enterprises that have been administratively
recalled due to quality problems, and vaccine companies that
have been investigated by criminals. Once this type occurs
and a case with extensive public opinion influence is formed,
it will often have a greater impact on the sustainable opera-
tion of the enterprise. It may also result in a series of civil
cases, such as quality claims, personal injury claims, share-
holder lawsuits, etc. It can be considered that if there is no
major change in the management or strategy of the company,
in addition to the impact of the phased factors, the above situ-
ation may have a certain continuity, thus which also can help
to predict the trend of the company’s frequent cases.

The second part is the analysis of the area where the case
occurred and the location of the main business of the com-
pany. The occurrence area may reflect the market share of the
business operations in the relevant regions. Generally speak-
ing, the outbreak of the case has a certain positive correlation
with the market share of the corresponding region. The larger
the business volume, the more the problem will be. Some-
times it can also indicate that there is a problem with the local
management and operation of the company, which leads to a
concentrated outbreak of controversy.

The third part is the analysis of the subject matter. Gener-
ally speaking, in the relevant cases, the greater the type of the
subject, the stronger the impact on the business operation. It
means that the management problems of the relevant parties
may be more prominent.

3 Task Definition
The International Big Data Analysis Competition subject
aims to predict the top two most possible legal litigation types
for each publicly traded company according to companies’
full size information.

For this competition, the organizer provides 18 data
forms3, including multi-dimensional information of publicly

3https://pan.baidu.com/s/1YaJcn-lpWVN2TSFDUFLwYw

traded companies in the past years, which can be seen from
Figure. 1. These data are from official statistic platform.
There is one unique ID for each company.

Figure 1: Data forms

The organizer has anonymized, discretized, and normal-
ized some of the information for the protection of data such
as corporate secrets, intellectual property rights, and debt in-
formation. The court notice is the core form, and the orga-
nizer has anonymized the types of legal documents in this
form. The types of legal documents processed are expressed
as: A-Q and others. As shown in Figure. 2, there is a wide
disparity in the amount of different types. We need to ex-
tract the top two most possible legal litigation types for each
company from this data form.

Figure 2: Distribution of the legal litigation type

They provide 3,000 companies as training data sets (actu-
ally about 1,500, with about 700 effective data). The com-
pany name is anonymized and expressed by enterprise num-
ber between 1001 and 4000. The data in some of the tables is
incomplete, and the companies provided may not all be used
as training sets, and flexible data processing is required. Also
the organizer provides about 500 companies as test data sets
(actually about 200) with enterprise number between 4001
and 4500. We should calculate the types of legal documents
that these companies may receive the most and the second
most.

28

https://pan.baidu.com/s/1YaJcn-lpWVN2TSFDUFLwYw


4 Approach
In this section, we will present end-to-end procedures of our
strategy. This work consists of four different parts which are
preprocessing, feature engineering, model establishment and
ensemble. The overall procedure is illustrated in Figure. 3.

We found that splitting the original problem into three sub-
problems can help to better fulfil the forecasting task. The
three sub-problems aim to evaluate whether the enterprise has
received the legal documents, the type of legal document that
the enterprise receives the most, and the type of legal docu-
ment that the enterprise receives the second most. The train-
ing data required for the three sub-problems are not the same,
moreover the three will affect each other. Therefore, the first
strategy aims to train the model separately, and then combing
the three classification algorithms, according to the results.

Figure 3: Overall procedure

4.1 Preprocessing
The basic principles of preprocessing for our raw data consist
of five parts. Firstly, all data have to be combed on multiple
time granularity, for instance we not only count the number
of civil cases received by the company in the last year but
also in the last two years etc. Secondly, if there are several
different time stamp for same data, they should be sorted out
specifically. Thirdly, the original data need to be eliminated
redundancy before it is counted. Fourthly, there are plenty of
data related to capital provided by organizer which need to
be reprocessed carefully. For example unified unit of money,
count stocks and cash respectively. Fifthly, in order to handle
the missing values problem we should attempt to use different
strategies as much as possible such as mean, mode, median
and so on.

Simplifying prediction labels is one of our special treat-
ment. As shown in Figure. 4, we find there are unbalanced
distribution of legal litigation type. The sum of proportion of
type A, D and K is over 90%, on the contrary some labels like
type C, F, O and Q are less than 1%. To deal with this situa-
tion, some labels have been considered as exception value if
their proportion are less than 1% and some labels have been
combined into one if their proportion are larger than 1% and

less than 5%. The same strategy is applied to organize the
second most legal litigation type data.

Figure 4: Distribution of the most legal litigation type

Another special treatment we have applied on the raw data
is using external knowledge. When we simplify the informa-
tion about administrative penalty, using the external knowl-
edge make the entire preprocessing process more rational. In
the raw data, the descriptions about context of administra-
tive penalty for company every year are different and com-
plicated. After reviewing the relevant regulations on admin-
istrative punishment, we make a summary of the descriptions
about administrative punishment. Extracting important infor-
mation from the complicated description, and based on this
we roughly divided them into new categories, such as com-
modity trademark related, computer infringement related, il-
legal occupation related and so on.

As shown in Figure. 5, the presence of outliers in the data
sets can be easily confirmed. Dealing with outliers is also a
very important part of data preprocessing. The key to this
procedure is eliminate outliers while keeping adequated data
volume. Because the amount of relevant data provided by
the official is limited, it is very important to be careful when
choosing the right method to ensure that do not eliminate too
much data. By comparing several different common methods,
we choose to detect outliers by artificial experience and PauTa
Criterion principle[Li et al., 2016], and at the end the problem
of outliers has been solved partly.

4.2 Feature Engineering
After preprocessing, some important features which are not
mentioned in the official material need to be constructed.
There are three methods have been used to construct the fea-
tures, basically the construction of features is designed by
data characteristics.

First, considering that the growth rate of important indica-
tors in the short term can predict the company’s changes in a
certain area, trend features have been made by assessing the
growth of data in the current two years relative to the com-
pany’s previous data. Such as for the data sets of the judicial
documents, the work to calculate the average number of civil
cases of each company in 2016-2017 and the number of civil
cases in 2015 needed to be done simultaneously. Soon after-
wards, using the previously obtained data, the growth rate of
civil cases can be calculated from the period of 2016 to the
end of 2017 relative to the previous year.

29



Figure 5: Distribution of number of civil case

Second, considering the differences between regional poli-
cies and the problems and challenges faced by various indus-
tries, statistical features need to be created to improve system
classification capabilities. The main method for constructing
statistical features is count the ranking information between
different regions, cities, industries, and sub-sectors as well as
the proportion of prediction labels, according to the average
registered capital and other information. The details are as
shown in Figure. 6 , there is significant difference between
industries for whether the legal documents will be received.
Based on empirical analysis, our team believes that the risks
of receiving legal documents in diverse industries are differ-
ent. The traditional industries with mature product quality
control and standardized personnel management procedures
are less threatened by legal documents, on the other hand new
industries are still at the stage of exploration, management is
not standardized, and legal instruments are more likely to be
received. Similarly, the difference of scale of enterprise may
also cause different preferences of legal litigation type. This
is also why we construct the feature for describing enterprise
scale by using registered capital and number of employees.

Figure 6: Distribution of whether to receive legal litigation in differ-
ent industy category

Third, due to constructing polynomial features is one of
the common methods for constructing new features, besides
it is widely used in statistical models to explore the effect

of compound variables on y. Based on experience, we use
second-order polynomial features to enrich the feature sets.

4.3 Model Establishment
Through consulting literature and investigation, four models
enter the candidate program which are LightGBM[Ke
et al., 2017], Xgboost[Chen and Guestrin, 2016],
RandomForest[Svetnik et al., 2003] and Neural
Network[Hansen and Salamon, 1990]. After experimental
verification, the results show that LightGBM, XGBoost work
best for this problem.

Figure 7: Single classification model for multi-class

To better solve the classification problem, a novel step-
wise refinement strategy is designed. First, the problem is
composed of one binary classification problem and two multi-
class classification problems. The binary classification model
is used to predict whether a company will receive legal docu-
ments over a period of time by LightGBM model. The multi-
class classification models are used to predict the specific le-
gal litigation type by LightGBM and Xgboost models. The
detailed procedure for multi-class classification is to predict
the type of legal litigation that the company will receive the
most firstly, then the predicted result need to be added as a

30



feature to the input feature sets of the second model. At
the end, the second model is used to predict the type of le-
gal litigation that the company may receive the second most.
The final results are derived from the binary classification re-
sults and the multi-class classification results. The details are
shown in Figure. 7.

For the LightGBM and XGBoost models of the multi-class
classification problem, 10 models are constructed by 10 fold
cross-validation, and the final prediction value is obtained by
the voting mechanism as the single model final prediction re-
sult. This action improves model accuracy and reduces over-
fitting. The details are shown in Figure. 8.

Figure 8: 10-fold cross validation

One challenge is that LightGBM and XGBoost models
contain some super-parameters, and the selection of pa-
rameters have a certain impact on the classification results.
Commonly used parameter search methods include: Ran-
dom Search[Bergstra and Bengio, 2012], Grid Search and
Bayesian Search[Feurer et al., 2015]. After many attempts,
Bayesian search is finally selected due to its superior perfor-
mance.

4.4 Ensemble
In real-world cases, training models to generalize on datasets
can be a very challenging problem as it can contain many
underlying distributions. Certain models will do well in mod-
elling one aspect of this data while others will do well in mod-
elling the others. Ensemble provides a solution where we can
train these models and make a joint prediction where the final
accuracy is better than each of the individual models.4

There are several commonly used ensemble methods,
such as voting[Rokach, 2010], averaging, and stacked
generalization[Williams and Gong, 2014] and blending. Af-
ter many experiments and verification applied in the multi-
class classification model task, voting is finally adopted. As
shown in Figure. 9, in order to ensure the effect of model en-
semble, there are differences in the input feature sets of the
four multi-class classification models. All of the feature sets

4https://medium.com/weightsandbiases/
an-introduction-to-model-ensembling-63effc2ca4b3

which are used are selected based on their performance in
single model.

Figure 9: Model ensemble

As shown in Figure. 10, our final result is coupled by the
prediction results of the binary classification model and all
the multi-class classification models.

Figure 10: Combination of binary model and multiple model

The final strategy we have adopted when merging the re-
sults of the binary classification result and multi-class classi-
fication result can be summarized as: firstly, if the prediction
result of binary classifications is positive, then focus on the
multi-class classification result, otherwise it is classified as
negative. Secondly, if the multi-class classification result is
displayed as others which is created when we have merged
some labels, further prediction is performed according to the
distribution of the original data sets, otherwise it is recorded
as the original multi-class classifier result.

5 Experiments
In this section, the final result will be presented. The experi-
ment environment we used is Python 3.6 and calls tools such

31

https://medium.com/weightsandbiases/an-introduction-to-model-ensembling-63effc2ca4b3
https://medium.com/weightsandbiases/an-introduction-to-model-ensembling-63effc2ca4b3


(a) binary (b) multiple

Figure 11: Training and testing curve for classification

as pandas 0.23.0, sklearn 0.19.1, lightgbm 2.2.3, etc.
After data preprocessing, the data volume of the multi-

class classification model is about 3200. On the contrary, the
input volume for binary model is more than 4,700 and the
validation set data volume is 133. The number of features
for binary model and four multi-class model are all around
20 to 25. Negative samples of relatively long time (such as
2011-2012, 2012-2013) can not fully indicate that the com-
pany did not receive legal documents during the year, but be-
cause of the loss of information and the incomplete statistics.
By counting the proportion of positive and negative samples
from 2011 to 2018, our team found that the proportions fluc-
tuated significantly, which clearly confirmed our conjecture.
Therefore, in order to eliminate the influence of observation
errors of these historical data, we only used the negative sam-
ples of 2017-2018 to join the training set.

The training/testing curve for binary and multiple classifi-
cation tasks shows in Figure. 11. The two figures show that
the prediction accuracy of the binary classification model as
well as multiple classification models all converge to a high
level.

The organizer provides an evaluation index algorithm for
the model effect. For every enterprise, if the model predicts
the correct results for both the most legal litigation type and
the second most legal litigation type, then the score for this
enterprise should be the max score, which is 100. If the model
predicts the correct result for the most legal litigation type but
the wrong result for the second most legal litigation type, then
the score for this enterprise should be a small amount of max
score, for example 35. The final score of the test datasets
should be the average score of all the enterprises.

Finally we scored 44 points and achieved the first place in
the competition.5 The excellent score of the competition also
shows the superiority of the model in this legal litigation type
prediction field.

5http://www.linkx.ac.cn/#/ranking

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a step-wise refinement classifica-
tion approach for legal litigation prediction which combines
binary and multi-class classification model based on param-
eter search and ensemble methods. The innovation for this
design is to evaluate the possibility distribution of legal doc-
uments received by enterprises before further distinguish the
specific type of legal litigation. When evaluated on officially
provided datasets, our model significantly outperforms all the
couterparts.

While our approach provides substantial performance gain,
there is still room for improvement. In the future, we would
like to discover more distinguishing features and illustrate the
interpretation of the proposed model.

References
[Bergstra and Bengio, 2012] James Bergstra and Yoshua

Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(Feb):281–305,
2012.

[Chen and Guestrin, 2016] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin.
Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings
of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowl-
edge discovery and data mining, pages 785–794. ACM,
2016.

[Feurer et al., 2015] Matthias Feurer, Jost Tobias Springen-
berg, and Frank Hutter. Initializing bayesian hyperparam-
eter optimization via meta-learning. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.

[Hansen and Salamon, 1990] Lars Kai Hansen and Peter
Salamon. Neural network ensembles. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, (10):993–
1001, 1990.

[Ke et al., 2017] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley,
Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and

32

http://www.linkx.ac.cn/##/ranking


Tie-Yan Liu. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boost-
ing decision tree. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 3146–3154, 2017.

[Li et al., 2016] Limin Li, Zongzhou Wen, and Zhongsheng
Wang. Outlier detection and correction during the pro-
cess of groundwater lever monitoring base on pauta crite-
rion with self-learning and smooth processing. In Theory,
Methodology, Tools and Applications for Modeling and
Simulation of Complex Systems, pages 497–503. Springer,
2016.

[Rokach, 2010] Lior Rokach. Ensemble-based classifiers.
Artificial Intelligence Review, 33(1-2):1–39, 2010.

[Svetnik et al., 2003] Vladimir Svetnik, Andy Liaw, Christo-
pher Tong, J Christopher Culberson, Robert P Sheridan,
and Bradley P Feuston. Random forest: a classification
and regression tool for compound classification and qsar
modeling. Journal of chemical information and computer
sciences, 43(6):1947–1958, 2003.

[Williams and Gong, 2014] Trefor P Williams and Jie Gong.
Predicting construction cost overruns using text mining,
numerical data and ensemble classifiers. Automation in
Construction, 43:23–29, 2014.

33


